CHAPTER XI.

INSTITUTIONS CONSIDERED AS ETHICAL IDEAS.

1. We have been guided throughout our argument by the idea that the
relation of a given mind to the mind of society [1] is comparable to
the relation between our apprehension of a single object and our view
of nature as a whole. The former term, in each case, we cannot but
suppose to be an individualised case of the latter. The latter seems
inevitably to imply a universal principle corresponding to every
feature of the former. We can never see through the connections, and
the connections of the connections--_e.g._ of gravitation and of
colour--in every part. But our ideal as theorists would be to analyse
the physical object into features, every one of which should be a
case of a natural law, and the whole taken together a case of the
whole system of natural law, which would be our scientific view of
the world.


In treating of a human mind in its relation to {297} Society and
the State, our ideal is comparable to this. We should like to
analyse any given mind into features each of which should be an
individual case of a universal principle, and the whole of which,
taken together, should be a case of the whole system of principles
incarnate in the world, and proximately in the social world. Plato,
simplifying for the sake of elucidation the City-state, which to our
minds was already simple, represented a community, in diagrammatic
form, as consisting in a threefold structure of classes, in which
were incarnate the three main features which he discriminated in
the individual soul--the desires necessary to living, the spirit of
action, and the power of seeing things as a whole.

2. The principles which constitute a society are facts as well as
ideas, and purposes as well as facts. This threefold character is
united in what we describe by the general term Òinstitutions,Ó a term
which would apply perfectly well to PlatoÕs ÒclassesÓ in virtue of
the definite relations with which he invests them.

It is unnecessary to insist on the external aspect of institutions as
facts in the material world; but it will be worth while to gather up
the leading conceptions of our analysis by tracing the nature of some
prominent Òinstitutions,Ó as ideas, constituent elements of the mind,
which are also purposes; that is, as ethical ideas. An institution
may have grown up without special ordinance, or may have been called
into existence by an act of public will. But it has always the
character of being recognised _as if_ it had been ÒinstitutedÓ or
established to fulfil some public or quasi-public {298} purpose. [1]
An old servant is sometimes said to be Òquite an institutionÓ--he
is characterised by the function of keeping alive certain common
traditions of a school, perhaps, or a family--an annual custom may
be an institution in virtue of the same kind of recognition; Sunday
is an institution; the word is indeed very vaguely applied, for
obviously almost every object or event can have a significance of
this kind attached to it in jest or earnest. But for all that, we can
see pretty plainly what usage is driving at. An institution implies
a purpose or sentiment of more minds than one, and a more or less
permanent embodiment of it. ÒOf more minds than one,Ó because it is
to fix the meeting points of minds that the external embodiment is
necessary.


In institutions, then, we have that meeting point of the individual
minds which is the social mind. But Òmeeting pointÓ is an unhappy
term, suggesting objects in space that touch at certain spots. Rather
let us say, we have here the ideal substance, which, as a universal
structure, is the social, but in its differentiated cases is the
individual mind. And it is necessary to observe that the material of
this fabric has determinate sources. Mind is not an empty point. It
is the world as experienced. The institutions, which as ethical {299}
ideas constitute mind, are, like a theory, attempts at unity in face
of needs, pressures, facts, and suggestions which arise in what we
call our surroundings, and to each of which mind reveals a different
quality; as every tone of a landscape elicits its peculiar shade of
feeling, which but for it might have remained latent for ever. It
takes the whole world to call out the whole mind. But it will be
enough if we can trace, in some prominent examples, the nature of an
institution as at once a dealing with surroundings, [1] an ethical
idea, and a social principle.


3. The family starts from the universal physical fact of parentage,
but takes its ethical value mainly from the special phase of parental
relation which leads to the formation of a household. The association
of parents and children in a household, which is permanent until
broken up into other households, is due to economic conditions.
Calling to mind the original meaning of words, we see that we are
asserting the formation of a house hold to be due to ÒhouseholdÓ
[1] conditions. And this is something more than a pun. Whatever the
surroundings may be which favour the formation of households, whether
the difficulty of procuring livelihood, which makes the fatherÕs
continued care essential, [2] or the chances offered by agriculture
to a stable group, they operate as elements in a human world, in a
world which is constituted by {300} the focussing of ÒsurroundingsÓ
(circumstances) in a whole. Conditions which have become ÒeconomicÓ
have ceased to be material. They are motives, interests, means to
ends. They bring the world into the mind, but in doing so they become
factors in the purposiveness and re-adjustment, which the mind, as
unity asserting itself throughout varied suggestions, is busied in
bringing to pass. By demanding permanence, for instance, economic
conditions elicit in the relation of parent and child the simplest
form of universality necessary to an ethical idea.


We will not venture upon the history of phases of the family life,
but will attempt at once to sketch its position and value in the
typical civilisation of a modern State. Only it must be insisted on
once more, [1] that the family or household as an ethical structure
is not anterior to the State, but is rather a growth dependent on the
spirit and protection of the State, and intentionally fostered by
it as against forms of kinship which do less justice to the ethical
possibilities of parentage.



As an ethical idea, then, the monogamous family, which is in the
normal case also a household, has a unique place in the structure of
the citizen mind.

Its peculiarity is in being a natural union of feeling with ideal
purpose. That is to say, the ideal purpose, a permanent interest
in a comparatively permanent and external life, attaches itself
by imperceptible links to the most universal incident of animal
existence. The mere remaining together of the units, a demand of
their physical needs, is almost enough of itself to transform their
inevitable {301} mutual dependence into a relation of intentional
service, rooted in affection, and tinged with some degree of
forethought.

And, being thus Ònatural,Ó the idea of the family has a hold like no
other upon the whole man. In this respect it anticipates the powers
which have been claimed for the love of beauty. The very animal
roots of life, and every detail of manÕs appetitive being, are made,
without conscious effort or moralising interference, factors in a
round of social service. The meal of a lonely individual [1] is
perhaps, at best, a refined and lawful pleasure. But the family meal,
quite apart from over-strained religionism, has in it, as a plain
matter of fact, the fundamental elements of a sacrament, none the
less effective that they are not thought of by that name. And both
through maintaining the fitness of the parents for their life work,
and through the training of the children to the same end, the natural
ethics of the family have an indispensable logical hold upon the more
explicit common good known to the social will.


And, in the last place, it should be noted that a feeling and
atmosphere of this kind is not confined to members actually living in
households formed by families. There is no race, it has been said,
that parts with its children so readily, or retains their affections
so permanently, as the Anglo-Saxon race. When the type and spirit are
once formed, they are contagious and persistent; they {302} affect
all who have seen or known them, and even those who have never formed
part of a household bound by kinship.

If we contrast the idea of the household with monasticism as its
repudiation, and with the tribal state or phalanstery as its
exaggeration, we shall see its uniqueness in the strongest light. The
naturalness of its foundation, and the completeness of the reciprocal
interest (involving monogamy) on which its idea rests, distinguish
it from all other forms of union or disunion in which the sexes are
concerned. It may be added that the family, and it alone, has the
right adjustment of population in its power. The fully trained and
equipped human being can never be superfluous in the world. And the
production of the fully trained and equipped human being depends on
the capacity of forming a true family and meeting its requirements,
and when this capacity and idea regulate the union of the sexes no
growth nor apparent decrease of population need cause anxiety.

It seems as idle to discuss whether civilisation is conceivable
without the family as whether human nature can change. All that
we can attempt, as philosophers, is to ascertain the distinctive
part which its idea plays in human life as such. There must be,
we can see, some such idea--an ethical idea covering some such
sides of life--while man is a spiritual animal. But by what
precise ÒinstitutionÓ such an idea might come to be represented in
circumstances which we do not know, it would be beyond the modesty of
philosophy to predict.

The institution of Property may be mentioned {303} as a corollary to
the household-family. Its natural basis and ethical value are very
markedly correlative to those of the latter. The outlook upon life
which it essentially implies is co-extensive with that demanded by
the household, although in the relations of acquisition and exchange
many further rights and duties may attach to it. It depends on the
fact that, in order to express a will in an individual life (which
is incomplete except as the life of a household), there must be a
power of moulding the material world in the service of ideas, which
is conditioned by free acquisition and utilisation. The institution
of property, then, as an ethical idea, consists in the conception
of individual (properly speaking, household) life as a unity in
respect to its dealings with the material instruments of living.
It is not merely the idea of provision for the future; still less
the certainty of satisfying wants as they arise from day to day. It
is the idea that all dealings with the material conditions of life
form part of a connected system, in which our conceptions and our
abilities express themselves. It binds together the necessary care
for food and clothing with ideas of making the most of our life and
of the lives dependent upon us. A being which has no will has so far
no property--a child has in practice, and a slave had by Roman law,
property in a secondary sense--and a being which has no property
has so far no actual will. The Òperson,Ó or responsible head (or
heads), of a household, is the true unit to whom the idea of property
attaches, because he is the unit to which we normally ascribe an
individualised will, a single {304} distinctive shape of the social
mind. A child has not yet such a will; a group of mature persons has
more than one. The change which is passing over the household in
consequence of the recognition of married women as individual wills
is highly instructive on this point. They can hold and manage their
own property, because it is admitted that they can have their own
view of life. It is not proposed that young children should hold and
manage property, because every one knows that they have no mature
individualised view of life. The corporate person of the household
is so far dissolved by legal recognition of its more individual
components; and it is most important, theoretically, to note that its
unity is not diminished by the recognition, but is raised to a higher
power.

4. It might seem fanciful to say that our district is to our family
as space to time; but it would suggest something of the point of
view from which it is well to look at the structure of our ethical
ideas. It is desirable to realise how the simplest characters of our
surroundings and their necessary connections are ethically important,
not because they impose anything upon us, but because they respond
to something within us, or rather, to a possibility which is to be
realised by the world, as in us its variety strives towards unity.
Parentage, we saw, was a universal animal fact, and from it, in
an experience capable of unity and permanence, springs the family
household and all that it implies for our lives. OneÕs district, as
an element of life, implies, of course, some stability--a home, not
merely permanent as a {305} home, like the ScythianÕs waggon, but
located on some spot of earth. The nomad, we must suppose, to a great
extent carries his neighbourhood--his tribe--along with him, and for
that very reason the fact of neighbourhood has not its full effect on
him.

But when a permanent home is fixed on some spot of earth, presumably
with the beginnings of agriculture, a new condition begins to
operate--the ÒindifferenceÓ of space. Perhaps we are surprised that
ÒindifferenceÓ should be an ethical stimulus. But nothing is more
instructive than to note how qualities of our surroundings, which by
themselves seem negative or the barest natural necessities, spring
into significance when taken up into the unity of life. Locality
means a potential neighbourhood. It may be long before any one comes
near you except your own cousinhood, your tribe or clan. But the
indifference of space is a standing invitation, and it is pretty
certain that some day strangers will become your neighbours, and
that you will have to take up some mental attitude towards them.
Historians and jurists have described to us the struggle between the
principle of kinship and the principle of neighbourhood. When we read
that a plebeian, in the eyes of a Roman patrician, simply could not
make a real marriage any more than the beasts of the field, this is
not, as it may have become by survival, intentional arrogance on the
patricianÕs part. It was rather the state of mind of Mrs. Transome
towards Rufus Lyon, Òsheer inability to consider him.Ó A proof of
what a struggle it involved to reach a new attitude of mind as
regarded the resident alien is given by {306} the half-way house at
which it was found necessary to pause in the process. The recognition
of kinship on the ground of residence was the fiction, we are told,
by which the mind assisted itself to a positive attitude towards
those whom the indifference of space insisted on bringing within its
range. And the positive attitude towards which it was groping its way
was of course the recognition of humanity, the equality of man in the
truest sense which that ambiguous phrase will bear.

In modern States, in which this struggle is on the whole behind
us, our district or locality asserts its full indifference. Its
ÒnegativeÓ here becomes a Òpositive.Ó That is to say, on the whole,
[1] and under some reasonable reservations as to evidence of
intention to accept duties, and to renounce incompatible ones, men
are full members of the district to which they choose to belong. The
challenge thrown down by the indifference of space has resulted in a
recognition of universal humanity. Our district is our neighbourhood.
We will look a little more closely at the ethical idea implied. We
notice at once, at least in English experience, that each of us
belongs to a variety of districts which are concentric as regards
him. Each of these districts represents a different purpose, and we
are told that for practical purposes great confusion results. But
it is a useful training to be made aware of the distinct purpose of
each {307} organised locality which surrounds us--to have the care
of our health, of public order, of education, of the relief of the
destitute, and of religion according to our view of it, represented
by different, or possibly different, boundary lines on the map. Each
of these boundaries indicates some common element of thought and
feeling--some common interest--in the mind of the neighbourhood, and
the difference of the boundaries, where they differ--the difference,
_e.g._, between the civil and ecclesiastical parish--may have a
long growth of ideas behind it. At any rate, all these are moral or
physical needs, which, like our household necessities, draw us out of
ourselves, and reveal us to ourselves as cases of a larger mind.


Every locality, then, is, however imperfectly and unconsciously, a
body which has a mind. It is, as an idea which enters into us, the
spiritual reflection of our adjacent surroundings, both human and
natural, as the family is of our animal parentage. The neighbourhood
is for the mind its immediate picture of the world, the frame into
which its further vista of society as a whole must be fitted, or, in
other words, its sphere of direct relations. The family is a group
of natural relations; but the neighbourhood consists of relations
which are as natural in a different way, not through blood, but
through contact. It is not a selection, but rather a specimen of
life as a whole, for it must include as a rule _all_ the necessary
elements of the social fabric. It includes all that comes to us by
direct sense-perception from day to day; all our chance meetings and
dealings with those outside our household, and probably the nearer
{308} and more reliable illustrations of all social and political
problems. For it is a context of life which we know and feel in its
total working, which is impossible with what we only gather from
writings or from hearsay.

As such a reflection of our direct surroundings, it colours our whole
basis of feeling, A peculiar tinge of happiness, anxiety, depression,
or resolution attaches to the streets or fields which we pass through
day by day, and the faces which we meet. How far these feelings are
true interpretations of what we see, and how far they spring from
superficial or sentimental associations, is one of the greatest tests
of the mind and heart. Do we see the body of a soul, the symbols of
character and happiness, in the houses, the streets, the tillage, the
workshops, or the gardens?

No other element of mind can be the substitute for the neighbourhood.
It is the faith in which we live, so far as embodied in our contact
with a sensuous world. It is a microcosm of humanity, in which, by
the very indifference of space, we are liable to the direct impact of
all possible factors. It is particularly the sphere of charity and
courtesy, of the right behaviour in immediate human relations of all
possible kinds.

The District or Neighbourhood, in short, as an ethical idea, is the
unity of the region with which we are in sensuous contact, as the
family is that of the world bound to us by blood or daily needs.
Local self-government, for example, acquires a peculiar character
from the possibilities of intimate knowledge of each other among
those who carry it on. A manÕs whole way of living {309} is in
question when he sets up to be locally prominent, and though the
result may often be corruption or vulgarity, [1] these are only the
failure of what, at its best, is a true type of the relation of
fellow-citizens.


As with the family, we may illustrate the significance of
Neighbourhood by the case in which it fails to be duly recognised,
and that in which nothing else is recognised.

To a great extent, in the life of modern cities, especially when
supplemented by suburban residence, the principle is disregarded.
In a great city, the actual neighbourhood is more than can be dealt
with, and has often no distinctive physical character--at least no
attractiveness--and the idea of a special relation to it falls away.
The fact, indeed, is less universal than is often asserted, and
nearness in space, together with local government, retain and will
retain a certain predominance over the mind. The total disregard
of an ethical purpose connecting us with the surroundings nearest
to us in bodily presence, tends to deprive the general life of its
vitality, its sensuous health, strength, and beauty. In many ways,
circuitous perhaps, but ultimately effective, it may be that this
factor of immediacy will regain a proper place in the national mind.
We may observe that in as far as electoral districts are treated as
mere circumscriptions of such and such numbers of electors, the life
of a neighbourhood is disregarded. To make the constituency a mere
{310} number (HareÕs scheme) would be the climax of this tendency.

In the ancient City-state, on the other hand, the district was all
powerful. The State was almost a sensuous fact. The members of the
State were essentially friends and neighbours, who for business or
pleasure were meeting all day long. When the district thus absorbs
the State, there is a want of what we call freedom, though there
may be enough of sensuous unconstraint. The State and its ideal
purposes are not clearly set above all flesh and blood. A great legal
system is not created till the State ceases to be a neighbourhood.
Individual intimacy [1] and the Òhard caseÓ obscure the idea of
universal law. The possibility of representative government, of a
political faith which does not work by sight, is not conceived.
The district, as a natural fact, was at first only a degree more
liberating than the natural fact of kinship. [2] It was not conceived
that man, as man, belonged Òneither to this place nor to Jerusalem.Ó
With the ideal unity of a modern nation such conceptions harmonise
much more readily, and the neighbourhood can lend them flesh and
blood without hiding them.


5. ÒClassÓ is in democratic countries no longer a political
institution. A manÕs vote is secured to him on a minimum
qualification, and his practical influence and acceptance depend
neither on {311} birth nor on occupation, but on the power which
he can exercise by his qualities or his possessions. This is a
consequence of the recognition of humanity as such, and has its bad
side and its good side according to the baseness and nobility of the
influences which tell _de facto_ upon human nature. It is horrible,
we may say, that influence should belong to wealth without any
security whatever for a discharge of social function. But this, given
human nature as it is to-day, is a result of the same causes which
enable us to boast, with some truth, that a man ranks in the general
world by his powers, character, and behaviour, and that we do not
know or care whether his livelihood comes to him as a miner or as a
duke. Wealth has weight because people give it weight; but no one
need give weight to wealth in politics or social intercourse unless
he likes. It is a consequence, then, of the recognition of free
humanity that ÒclassÓ no longer is an institution in political right
as such, while in social intercourse, though it practically exists as
an institution, it claims to be an expression of what people are in
character and behaviour, and its differences are not annexed by any
iron bond to differences of occupation. [1]


But though occupation no longer determines either social or political
class, in the sense of {312} gradation by any formal bond, yet it
remains and must always remain a determinant of class in a narrower
sense, and one of the main ideas which constitute the ethical
structure of the mind.

The necessities which we compared roughly to time and space--the
proximate permanent group and the adjacent locality--give a value to
manÕs animal routine, and a significance to the area of his every-day
perceptions. It is when the division of labour, the requital of
one service by a different one, becomes prominent in a community,
that a further grasp is laid upon the distinctive capacities of the
individual consciousness, in which must be reckoned the surroundings
which constitute its horizon of possibilities. We still answer
the general question, ÒWhat is he?Ó by naming a manÕs industry or
profession. The family and the neighbourhood sustain and colour the
individual life, but the vocation stamps and moulds it. The more
definite and articulate summons of the organising world--in which of
course intelligence is active, ever discerning new purposes in old
routine--elicits a deeper response from, or takes a more concrete
shape in, the particular centre of consciousness. The individual has
his own nature communicated to him as he is summoned to fit himself
for rendering a distinctive service to the common good. He becomes
ÒsomethingÓ; an incarnation of a factor in the social idea.

The Roman word Òclass,Ó which the English language has adopted, not
for every separate employment, but for the character and position
roughly connected with a whole group of employments, has an origin
worth recalling. PlatoÕs classes {313} were Ò_genera_Ó = clans,
extended families. The German classes were ÒStŠndeÓ = statuses,
positions, estates (compare the French ÒŽtat,Ó which practically =
trade). But the Roman ÒclassisÓ was Òa summoningÓ to public service;
the first and second classes were the first and second summonings;
[1] then indeed to military service in an order based on wealth. But
the idea may survive. Our ÒclassÓ may be thought of as the group or
body in which we are called out for distinctive service.


OneÕs class, then, in the sense in which it indicates the type
of position and service involved in oneÕs occupation, approaches
very near the centre of oneÕs individuality. In principle, as an
ethical idea, it takes the man or woman beyond the family and the
neighbourhood; and for the same reason takes him deeper into himself.
He acquires in it a complex of qualities and capacities which put
a special point upon the general need of making a livelihood for
the support of his household. In principle, his individual service
_is_ the social mind, as it takes, in his consciousness, the shape
demanded by the logic of the social whole. He is Òa public workerÓ
[1] by doing the service which society demands of him. And just
because the service is in principle something particular, unique, and
distinctive, he feels himself in it to be a member of a unity held
together by differences. And in this sense the bond of social union
is not in similarity, but in the highest degree of individuality
or specialisation, the ultimate point of which would be to feel
that I am rendering {314} to society a service which is necessary,
and which no one but me can render--the closest conceivable tie,
and yet one, which in a sense, really exists in every case. Your
special powers and functions supply my need, and my special powers
and functions supply your need, and each of us recognises this and
rejoices in it. This ethical idea of unique service, or the service
of a unique class, involves of course a more or less conscious
identity in difference. That is to say, the individualÕs mind is not
reduced to his special service, or he would be a machine. Rather,
the whole social consciousness is present in him, but present in
a modified form, according to the point of view from which it is
looking. The problem is simply put by PlatoÕs diagrammatic scheme of
classes. The statesmanÕs function is to be wise for the community;
the carpenterÕs to carpenter for the community. But plainly the
community for which the statesman knows that he has to be wise, must
include the carpenterÕs life and the conditions of his work, and the
community for which the carpenter knows that he has to work must
include some of the order and organisation which belong to it in the
statesmanÕs vision. The individual, in short, is unique, or belongs
to a unique class, not as an atom, but as a case of a law, or term
of a connection. This is what is meant by individuality in the true
sense; the character of a unit which has a great deal that, being his
very self, cannot be divided from him; not one which has so little
that there is nothing by subtraction of which he can be imagined
less. Such individuality is in a sense the whole ethical idea, but
more particularly is embodied in {315} the idea of a vocation. Our
vocation, like our neighbourhood, and usually of course in connection
with it, stamps both mind and body; and what we consider most
intimately ourself is really the structure of ethical ideas which
we are describing, with the feelings and habits in which they are
rooted, but none of which are unmodified by them.


Like the other ideas of which we have spoken, the idea of class
or specialised function may be illustrated both by the extreme in
which it is nothing, and the extreme in which it is everything.
The less a society is differentiated--the less that, considered as
a mind, it has developed intense and determinate capacities--the
more its structure repeats itself from household to household, [1]
and fails to exhibit lines of formation pervading the community as
a whole. DiceyÕs _The Peasant State_ [2] gives an idea of a social
mind thus undifferentiated, without classes, without ambitions, and
without interests. Both in this case and in that of the Boers of the
Transvaal it would be rash for an outsider to pronounce dogmatically
on the value of the life which is achieved. But as cases of social
formation and of social minds, they illustrate our present theme. To
say that there is no specialised function, is the same as to say that
there is no developed intelligence.


ÒClassÓ appears to be everything, an absolute and inflexible rule
of precedence and privilege, when it has lost or has not gained the
power of accommodating itself to function, and function to social
logic. Such denials of free adjustment, of {316} the career open to
talents, may take the form of a confusion of the principle of class
with that of birth, or even with that of private property. In the
former case function and position are inherited, in the latter they
are bought and sold. The two confusions may even be combined, as when
public functions are inherited like or with a house or an estate. [1]
Such a ÒclassÓ system may be an oppression to its members, [2] or
to the community, or to both. But the essence of the evil is that a
function of mind is divorced from its characteristic of free logical
adaptation within the social system. The institution has become
ossified; and instead of moulding itself, like a theory or a living
organism, to the facts and needs which it is there to meet, it nails
itself to an alien principle, and becomes a fallacy in social logic,
or a dead organ in the social body.


In both of these extreme cases individuality is minimised. In the
former the individual does not pretend to any high capacity. In
the latter he pretends to a considerable capacity, but this being
cut apart from the principle of the whole, and pretending to be
everything in itself to exist absolutely or for its own sake has lost
the connection which gave it value, and becomes a mere pretension.

There is a strange and sad institution in which, it may be suggested,
the two extremes of error are combined. This is the institution of
Òthe {317} poorÓ as a class, representing, as an ethical idea in the
modern mind, a permanent object of compassion and self-sacrifice.
ÒPoverty,Ó it has been said, Òhas become a status.Ó The ÒdŽclassŽsÓ
have become a social class, with the passive social function of
stimulating the goodness of others. [1] Let any one consider
carefully, from the point of view which regards ethical ideas as
an embodiment of human or social purposes, the offertory sentences
of the Church of England. It is needless to press the criticism,
for no one would be likely to deny that here we have ideas gathered
from other soils and climates, and rightly applicable only in the
spirit, but not in the letter. ÒGive alms of thy goods, and never
turn thy face from any poor man; and then the face of the Lord
shall not be turned away from thee.Ó ÒHe that hath pity upon the
poor lendeth unto the Lord, and look, what he layeth out it shall
be paid him again.Ó The victims of misfortune in a small community,
under strict regulations, as were the Jews, for the promotion of
industry, are one thing. The recognition of a class marked by _the
function of dependence_--to use a contradictory expression--in a
vast community whose industrial organisation rests on the individual
will, is another thing. The idea of pity and self-denial, inherited,
I presume, largely from the Jewish scriptures as also from the New
Testament, has tended, in the modern world, to become mechanical,
and combine with a false class-conception. All who know the inner
life of evangelical Christians a {318} generation ago will admit
that, among earnest persons of this type, the notion of the
tithe--the devotion of one tenth or more of the income to purposes
of religion or benevolence--had been inherited as a guiding idea,
representing an end valuable _per se_, almost according to the
letter of the offertory. I am not suggesting any vulgar charge of
other-worldliness, but recalling a genuine conviction that the
surrender of a portion of income to a less fortunate class of the
community was in itself desirable and a religious duty.



It would not be difficult to show that the true and highest idea
of Christian charity is remote from this conception of a dependent
status as inherent in a certain portion of society. What seems to be
needed here, as in so many aspects of morality and religion, is to
combine the inspiration and _abandon_ of the modern mind with the
definiteness of purpose and lucidity of plan that characterised the
ancient City-state.

Socialism, at its best, [1] unites with recent political economy
and with those who try to ÒorganiseÓ or rationalise charity, in
challenging the preconception that poverty must be recognised as a
permanent class-function. And this brave denial may remain written to
its credit when the controversies of immediate method are forgotten.



We may attempt to indicate in a few words the direction in which
the ethical idea incarnate in the institution of the ÒpoorÓ is
tending to supplement and modify itself as clearer notions of a
commonwealth arise. It may be observed, by {319} way of introduction,
that we cruelly misconceive the Greek mind when we ascribe to it
a want of love and compassion, because we miss in its utterances
the religious note of devotion to the poor. [1] To a great extent
the truest idea of charity was presupposed in the very axioms of a
Greek commonwealth. The Greek spoke little of Òthe poor,Ó because
he recognised no such status. [2] It would have meant to him a
functionless class, a dislocation of the body politic. This, in
fact, is what it did mean when pauperism began to press upon the
Greeks, and the philosopher [3] at once diagnoses the evil, and uses
the term, Òpeople without means,Ó _i.e._ without ways of supporting
themselves, instead of the older word, which rather suggests the
Òobject of ÔcharityÕÓ. To get them back into a function, Òa means,Ó
is the course which _ipso facto_ rises before him; not to create a
new ethical idea for their sake _qua dŽclassŽs_.


The full modern conception of the ÒpoorÓ as {320} an institution, if
they must be an institution, ought at least to avoid the pitfall of
acquiescence. Granting the fire and love of the Christian mind to be
a gain, yet its object must be brought into relation with the true
meaning of a mind or a commonwealth. Devotion to man at his weakest
must not be separated from devotion to the possibilities of man at
his strongest--possibilities either existent or at least symbolised
in the most unhappy of the functionless poor. Self-sacrifice for
the poor should not mean a tribute to the maintenance of a vicious
status, but an abiding and pervading sense of the claims which the
weaker humanity has to be made strong.

6. The Nation-State, we have already suggested, is the widest
organisation which has the common experience necessary to found
a common life. This is why it is recognised as absolute in power
over the individual, and as his representative and champion in the
affairs of the world outside. It is obvious that there can be but
one such absolute power in relation to any one person; and that, so
far as the world is organised, there must be one; and, in fact, his
discharge from one allegiance can only be effected by his acceptance
of another. The analysis of the previous chapter releases us from the
task of setting out the elements which combine in the Nation-State,
as the conception of sovereign and ultimate adjustment between the
spheres which realise the elements of our ethical life. It should be
noted, however, that the principles of the family, the district, and
the class, not only enter into the nation in these definite shapes,
but affect the general fabric of {321} the national State through the
sense of race, of country, and of a pervading standard of life and
culture. The reaction of ideal unity on the natural conditions of a
state is exemplified by the tendency to substitute ideal frontiers--a
meridian or a parallel [1]--for frontiers determined by natural
boundaries.



The Nation-State as an ethical idea is, then, a faith or a
purpose--we might say a mission, were not the word too narrow and
too aggressive. It seems to be less to its inhabitant than the
City-state to its citizens; but that is greatly because, as happens
with the higher achievements of mind, it includes too much to be
readily apprehended. The modern nation is a history and a religion
rather than a clear cut idea. Its power as an idea-force is not known
till it is tried. How little the outsider, and even members of the
community concerned, were able to gauge beforehand the strength of
the sentiment and conception that pervaded the United States through
the war of secession. 


7. Our analysis of the Nation-State suggests a point of view which
may be applied to the vexed question of whether State action is to be
judged by the same moral tests as private action.

The first step is to get a clear idea of the nature of State action.
It must be confined, one would think, to what is done in the name of
the State, and by something approaching to an act of will on its part
as a State. We only pass moral judgment on individuals in respect
of their acts of will, and we ought to extend the same justice to
a State. The question is complicated by the fact that a State has,
as its accredited agents, individuals whose acts it must normally
avow. But it can hardly be saddled with moral responsibility for
their personal misdoings, except under circumstances which are barely
conceivable. [1] The State, as such, can have no ends but public
ends; and in practice it has none but what its organs conceive to
be public ends. If an agent, even under the order of his executive
superior, commits a breach of morality, _bona fide_ in order to what
he conceives to be a public end desired by the State, he and his
superior are certainly {323} blamable, but the immorality can hardly
be laid at the door of the public will.


It may be said that this distinction between public and private acts
leads to the casuistry of pure intention. We are saying, it will be
urged, that the State remains pure, because its will is on the whole
towards a public interest, whatever crimes its agents may commit.
And, no doubt, this line is often taken in practice. A successful
agent finds his evil deeds are winked at; an unsuccessful one is
disavowed. In either case the State pleads innocence. But this danger
cannot alter the conditions of a moral action, and we cannot impute
that as an action to the State, of which it knew no particulars,
which it never {324} willed, and which can hardly indeed be the
object of a public will. It has a duty to see to the character of its
agents and punish their excesses; but the conditions under which it
is true that _qui facit per alium facit per se_, can seldom apply to
a public body with regard to actions of its agent which are not of a
nature to embody public ends.

Promises and treaties, however, are acts which embody public ends.
And here the State, on its side, is bound to maintain good faith; but
still its agent is likely to go wrong if he mixes up the obligations
of the State with his private honour. The question for him, if he
has to keep or break a public undertaking, is, to what is the State
substantially bound, not to what extent would he be bound if he had
made the promise or engagement in question in his private capacity?
He, or the power which is to act, must consider the obligations and
aims of the State, as a whole, and work for the best fulfilment of
them as a whole. The question may be _parallel to_ that of a private
case of honour, but it is not _his_ honour nor _his_ promise that is
in question. Just so, if he introduces his private conscience about
religion or morality into his public acts on behalf of the State,
he may cause frightful persecutions or disasters. The religious
persecutions, and our position in India, supply examples.

The State, then, exists to promote good life, and what it does cannot
be morally indifferent; but its actions cannot be identified with
the deeds of its agents, or morally judged as private volitions
are judged. Its acts proper are always public acts, {325} and it
cannot, as a State, act within the relations of private life in which
organised morality exists. It has no determinate function in a larger
community, but is itself the supreme community; the guardian of a
whole moral world, but not a factor within an organised moral world.
Moral relations presuppose an organised life; but such a life is
only within the State, not in relations between the State and other
communities.

But all this, it may be urged, is beside the question. The question
is not, can a State be a moral individual (though this is certainly
one question)? but, does an interest of State justify what would
otherwise be immorality or wrong-doing on the part of an officer of
State?

Again, I think, we must distinguish between acts essentially private
and acts essentially public. To steal or murder, to lie, or to commit
personal immorality, for instance, as we said, cannot be a public
act. Such acts cannot embody a general interest willed by the public
will. A State agent who commits them in pursuit of information or
to secure a diplomatic result cannot be justified on the ground
that they are not his acts but the StateÕs; and they are as immoral
in him as in anyone else. Ultimately, indeed, it may be true that
there is no act which is incapable of justification, supposing some
extreme alternative; and in this sense, but in this sense only, it
might be that, treating the interest of a commonwealth like any other
ethically imperative interest, such acts might be relatively capable
of justification. But this justification would only mean that some
supreme interest was subserved by them, and would have {326} no
special relation to the supposed public character of the interest.
It is then a case of the conflict of duties. And the commoner
occurrence, which results in doubtful acts, probably is that an
agent, charged with some public service, finds it easiest to promote
it by some act of rascality, and acts on his idea. But over readiness
to make capital out of an apparent conflict of duties is neither made
worse nor better by the fact that one of the duties is the service of
the State. [1]


A public act which inflicts loss, such as war, confiscation, the
repudiation of a debt, is wholly different from murder or theft. It
is not the act of a private person. It is not a violation of law.
[1] It can hardly be motived by private malice or cupidity in the
strict sense, and it is not a breach of an established moral order
by a being within it and dependent upon it for the organisation and
protection of his daily life. It is the act of a supreme power,
which has ultimate responsibility for protecting the form of life of
which it is the guardian, and which is not itself protected by any
scheme of functions or relations, such as prescribes a course for the
reconciliation of rights and secures its effectiveness. The means
adopted by such a supreme power to discharge its responsibilities
as a whole, are of course subject to criticism as respects the
conception of good which they {327} imply and their appropriateness
to the task of realising it. But it is mere confusion to apply
to them names borrowed from analogous acts of individuals within
communities, to impute them, as it were, to individuals under
dyslogistic predicates and to pass moral judgment upon them in the
same sense as on private acts. The nearest approach which we can
imagine to public immorality would be when the organs which act for
the State, as such, exhibit in their public action, on its behalf, a
narrow, selfish or brutal [2] conception of the interest of the State
as a whole, in which, so far as can be judged, public opinion at the
time agrees. In such a case the State, as such, may really be said
to be acting immorally, _i.e._ in contravention of its main duty to
sustain the conditions of as much good life as possible. This case
must be distinguished, if I am right, from the case in which the
individuals, acting as the public authority, are corrupted in their
own private interests [3] not shared with the public. For then the
case would rather be that the State, the organ of the public good,
had not been given a chance to speak, but had simply been defrauded
by those who spoke in its name.


We do not suggest, then, that the action of States is beyond moral
criticism, nor that action of individuals in their interest is
above or below morality, except in the sense in which one moral
claim has constantly to be postponed to another. But we {328} deny
that States can be treated as the actors in private immoralities
which their agents permit themselves in the alleged interest of the
State; or, again, can be bound by the private honour and conscience
of such agents; and we deny, moreover, that the avowed public acts
of sovereign powers, which cause loss or injury, can be imputed to
individuals under the names of private offences; that someone is
guilty of murder when a country carries on war, or of theft when it
adopts the policy of repudiation, confiscation, or annexation.

8. It is obvious that the idea of humanity, of the world of
intelligent beings on the surface of our earth, conceived as a unity,
must hold such a place in any tolerably complete philosophical
thinking, as in some way to control the idea of particular States,
and to sum up the purposes and possibilities of human life. The idea
of humanity is universal, and whatever limits we have tacitly in
mind--whatever limits the Greek thinker had in mind while he based
his ethics on the distinction between man and beast--yet, when we
rely on the idea of man as man, we are committed to treat in some way
of the world of mankind.

_(a)_ The first point which forces itself upon our attention is,
that the idea which we tacitly entertain when we refer to humanity,
is not true of the greater part of mankind. No doubt, we are quite
aware of imperfection and inconsistency in the family and the State.
But here, in the case of mankind, the problem reaches an acuter form.
According to the current ideas of our civilisation, a great part of
the lives which {329} are being lived and have been lived by mankind
are not lives worth living, in the sense of embodying qualities for
which life seems valuable to us. [1] It is true that, in all to whom
we give the name of man, we suppose a possibility of such living, in
the sense that they have an intelligence distinguishable from that of
animals. But it is a possibility which, for the most part, has been
very slightly realised, and which involves no conscious connection,
so far as we can see, with any realisation. Our idea of man is not
formed by simple enumeration, but by framing a law which explains the
less perfect and consistent facts with reference to the more perfect
and more consistent facts.


_(b)_ This being so, it seems to follow that the object of our
ethical idea of humanity is not really mankind as a single community.
Putting aside the impossibilities arising from succession in time,
we see that no such identical experience can be presupposed in all
mankind as is necessary to effective membership of a common society
and exercise of a general will. It does not follow from this that
there can be no general recognition of the rights arising from
the capacities for good life which belong to man as man. Though
insufficient, as variously and imperfectly realised, to be the basis
of an effective community, they may, as far as realised, be a common
element or tissue of connection, running through the more concrete
experience on which effective communities {330} rest. Such a relation
as that of England and India brings the matter home. Englishmen
cannot make one effective self-governed community with the Indian
populations. It would be misery and inefficiency to both sides. But
our State can recognise the primary rights of humanity as determined
in the life of its Indian subjects, and enforce or respect these
rights, whether India be a dependency or an independent community.
The problem is not unlike that raised by the idea of a universal
language. As a substitute for national languages, it would mean a
dead level of intelligence unsuited to every actual national mind,
the destruction of literature and poetry. As an addition to existing
languages, or more simply, if it became customary for every people
to be acquainted with the tongues of other nations, there would be a
common understanding no less firm, and a vast gain of appreciation
and enjoyment, a levelling up instead of levelling down. The
recognition of human rights through communities founded on organic
unity of experience may be compared in just these terms to the idea
of a universal society including the entire human race.

_(c)_ The contrast between humanity and mankind has always uttered
itself through a dichotomous mode of expression--Jew and Gentile,
Greek [1] and barbarian, Mussulman and infidel, Christian {331} and
heathen, white civilisations and the black and yellow races. It will
be noted at once that some of these divisions contradict each other,
and this fact may suggest the probability that to every people its
own life has seemed the crown of things, and the remainder of mankind
only the remainder. Such a suggestion may have a real bearing on our
problem, and we will return to it. In the meantime, however, it is
plain that humanity [2] as an ethical idea is a type or a problem
rather than a fact. It means certain qualities, at once realised in
what we take to be the crown of the race, and including a sensibility
to the claims of the race as such. Sensibility to the claims of the
race as such, is least of all qualities common to the race as such.
The respect of States and individuals for humanity is then, after
all, in its essence, a duty to maintain a type of life, not general,
but the best we know, which we call the most human, and in accordance
with it to recognise and deal with the rights of alien individuals
and communities. This conception is opposed to the treatment of all
individual human beings as members of an identical community having
identical capacities and rights. It follows our general conviction
that not numbers but qualities determine the value of life. But
qualities, of course, become self-contradictory if they fail to meet
the demands imposed on them by numbers.

And thus we recur to a suggestion noted {332} above. Every people,
as a rule, seems to find contentment in its own type of life. This
cannot contradict, for us, the imperativeness of our own sense of
the best. But it may make us cautious as to the general theory of
progress, and ready to admit that one type of humanity cannot cover
the whole ground of the possibilities of human nature. Our action
must, no doubt, be guided by what we can understand of human needs,
and this must depend ultimately on our own type of life. But it
makes a difference whether we start from the hypothesis that our
civilisation as such stands for the goal of progress, or admit that
there is a necessity for covering the whole ground of human nature.
And it may be that, as the ground is covered, our States may go the
way which others have gone, without, however, leaving things as they
are. If the State, moreover, is not ultimate nor above criticism, no
more is any given idea of humanity; and reference to Òthe interests
of mankindÓ only names the problem, which is to find out what those
interests are, in terms of human qualities to be realised.


_(d)_ Neither the State, however, nor the idea of humanity, nor
the interests of mankind, are the last word of theory. And even
political theory must so far point ahead as to show that it knows
where to look for its continuation. We have taken Society and the
State throughout to have their value in the human capacities which
they are the means of realising, in which realisation their social
aspect is an inevitable condition (for human nature is not complete
in solitude), but is not by itself, in its form of multitudes, the
end. {333} There is, therefore, no breach of continuity when the
immediate participation of numbers, the direct moulding of life by
the claims and relations of selves, falls away, and the human mind,
consolidated and sustained by society, goes further on its path in
removing contradictions and shaping its world and itself into unity.
Art, philosophy, and religion, though in a sense the very life-blood
of society, are not and could not be directly fashioned to meet the
needs and uses of the multitude, and their aim is not _in that sense_
Òsocial.Ó They should rather be regarded as a continuation, within
and founded upon the commonwealth, of the work which the commonwealth
begins in realising human nature; as fuller utterances of the same
universal self which the Ògeneral willÓ reveals in more precarious
forms; and as in the same sense implicit in the consciousness of
all, being an inheritance which is theirs so far as they can take
possession of it.

We have thus attempted to trace in outline the content of the self,
implied, but imperfectly and variously reached, in the actual
individual consciousness. It is because of this implication, carrying
the sense that something more than we are is imperative upon us, that
self-government has a meaning, and that freedom--the non-obstruction
of capacities--is to be found in a system which lays burdens on the
untamed self and Òforces us to be free.Ó What we feel as mere force
cannot as such be freedom; but in our subtle and complex natures the
recognition of a force may, as we have tried to explain, sustain,
regularise, and reawaken the operation of {334} a consciousness
of good, which we rejoice to see maintained, if our intelligence
fails of itself to maintain it, against indolence, incompetence,
and rebellion, even if they are our own. This is the root of
self-government, and true political government is self-government.


