CHAPTER VIII.

NATURE OF THE END OF THE STATE AND CONSEQUENT LIMIT OF STATE ACTION.

1. According to the course of thought which we have been pursuing,
the distinction between the individual on the one hand, and the
social or political whole on the other, is not relevant to the
question where the ÒendÓ of man in Society is to be sought. For the
conceptions of Society and the Individual are correlative conceptions
through and through; at whatever level, therefore, we take the one,
we are bound to construe the other as at the same level; so that,
to distinguish the one element from the other as superior from
inferior, or as means from end, becomes a contradiction in terms. If
we begin by drawing boundaries round the individual, the boundaries
which we draw reproduce themselves in society conceived as a total
of such individuals, and the question of means and end, as we saw
in BenthamÕs case, [1] takes the form whether ÒeachÓ is the means
to the welfare of Òall,Ó or ÒallÓ to the welfare of ÒeachÓ; the
distinction thus becoming purely verbal. While, if we set no limit
to individuality, except the limit of the nature {181} which makes
it contributory to the social universal, then we find that the
advancements of the universal and of its differences vary together,
and are indeed one and the same thing. It is idle to think of
dissociating them as means and end.



The only way in which the idea of means and end can be applied to
the social whole and its parts, is to take Society when at its lower
level, being dealt with under the aspect of mere plurality, as a
means to what it is at its higher level, when realised as a communion
of individualities at their best. But from this point of view we get
no distinction of means and end as between Individuals and Society.
What we get is Individuals and Society alike, as understood and
partly existing at one level (that of commonplace Individualism and
Collectivism), taken as a means to both Individuals and Society
at a higher level. As we have seen, the only true explanation of
self-government is to throw the reality of the self outside what
passes for its average nature, and in this sense the average nature
may be treated as a means to the truer or fuller self--as something,
that is to say, which is instrumental to the latter, and has no
rights against it.

2. For us, then, the ultimate end of Society and the State as of
the individual is the realisation of the best life. The difficulty
of defining the best life does not trouble us, because we rely
throughout on the fundamental logic of human nature _qua_ rational.
We think ourselves no more called upon to specify in advance what
will be the details of the life which satisfies an intelligent being
as such, than we are called upon to specify in advance {182} what
will be the details of the knowledge which satisfies an intelligent
being as such. Wherever a human being touches practice, as wherever
he touches theory, we find him driven on by his intolerance of
contradictions towards shaping his life as a whole. What we mean by
ÒgoodÓ and ÒtruthÓ is practical and theoretical experience in so far
as the logic which underlies manÕs whole nature permits him to repose
in it. And the best life is the life which has most of this general
character--the character which, so far as realised, satisfies the
fundamental logic of manÕs capacities.

Now, it is plain that this best life can only be realised in
consciousness, that being the medium of all satisfaction and the
only true type of a whole in experience. And all consciousness, as
experienced by man, is on one side particular, attached to bodies,
and exclusive of consciousnesses attached to other bodies. In a
sense, it is true that no one consciousness can partake of or
actually enter into another. Thus, it is apt to be held, as we have
amply seen, that the essential danger of State interference lies in
the intrusion of something originated by ÒothersÓ upon a distinct
particular consciousness, whose distinction and particularity--its
freedom--are thus impaired. It is all-important to our point of view
that this prejudice should be dispelled. Force or automatic custom
or authoritative tradition or ÒsuggestionÓ are not hostile to one
individuality because they come from Òothers,Ó but because their
nature is contradictory to the nature of the highest self-assertion
of mind, because they are, so to speak, in a medium incompatible with
its medium. They {183} are just as hostile to this self-assertion,
just as alien, if they emanate, as they constantly do, from
conflicting elements in our complex private experience, as if they
come to us, as we say, Òfrom without.Ó The question is of their
ÒnatureÓ and tendency, not of their centre of origin. Individuals are
limited and isolated in many ways. But their true individuality does
not lie in their isolation, but in that distinctive act or service
by which they pass into unique contributions to the universal. True
individuality, as we have said, is not in the minimisation which
forbids further subdivision, but in the maximisation which includes
the greatest possible being in an inviolable unity. It is not,
therefore, the intrusion upon isolation, as such, that interferes
with individuality; it is the intrusion, upon a growing unity of
consciousness, of a medium hostile to its growth.

But we have seen that force, automatism, and suggestion, are in
some ways necessary to the support and maintenance of the human
consciousness, owing to its animal limitations. They are, indeed, as
is well known, the condition of its progress. Therefore, in promoting
the best life, these aids must be employed by society as exercising
absolute power--viz., by the State. And the problem presented
by their employment is _not_ a question of the Òinterference of
the State with the IndividualÓ--an antithesis which is strictly
meaningless; but it is a question how far and in what way the use of
force and the like by the State is a hindrance to the end for which
the State itself exists. In other words, it is to be ascertained
how far the fullest self-assertion of the social {184} universal
in its differences--the best life--can be promoted or is likely to
be endangered by means which are of a different order, and so in
some circumstances opposed to it. The point is not that _I_ and
some thousands more break in by force upon _you_ in particular and
violate _your_ isolation; but that such breaking in by force, whoever
does it and whoever suffers by it, and even if through passion or
obsession _you_ do it to _your_self and _I_ to _my_self, is hostile
_prima facie_ to the living logic of the will, which alone can create
a unity and realise a best. How then, and under what reservations,
in the complicated conflict of the fuller and narrower self, can
this dangerous drug of violence be administered, so to speak, as a
counter-poison to tendencies which would otherwise give no chance
to the logical will? With this difficulty in our minds, we will
endeavour to determine the general principle on which force and
menace should be used by the State, and a routine be mechanically
maintained by it.

3. We have hitherto spoken of the State and Society as almost
convertible terms. [1] And in fact it is part of our argument that
the influences of Society differ only in degree from the powers of
the State, and that the explanation of both is ultimately the same.
But on the other hand, it is also part of our argument that the
State as such is a necessary factor in civilised life; and that no
true ideal lies in the direction of minimising its individuality or
restricting its absolute power. By the State, then, we mean Society
as a unit, recognised as rightly exercising control over its members
{185} through absolute physical power. The limits of the unit are, of
course, determined by what looks like historical accident; but there
is logic underneath the apparent accident, and the most tremendous
political questions turn upon the delimitation of political units.
A principle, so to speak, of political parsimony--_entia non sunt
multiplicanda praeter necessitatem_, Òtwo organisations will not
survive when one can do the workÓ--is always tending to expand the
political unit. The limits of the common experience necessary for
effective self-government are always operating to control this
expansion. We might therefore suggest, as a principle determining
the area of states, Òthe widest territorial area compatible with the
unity of experience which is demanded by effective self-government.Ó
But the State _de facto_ (which is also _de jure_) is the Society
which is recognised as exercising compulsory power over its members,
and as presenting itself _qua_ a single independent corporation among
other independent corporations. Without such power, or where, if
anywhere, it does not exist, there can be no ultimate and effective
adjustment of the claims of individuals, and of the various social
groups in which individuals are involved. It is the need for this
ultimate effective adjustment which constitutes the need that every
individual in civilised life should belong to one state, and to one
only. Otherwise his ÒrealÓ will might have no working representative
at all, but all be sheer conflict. That Society, then, is a State,
which is habitually recognised as a unit lawfully exercising force.
We saw that the characteristics of Society pass gradually into those
of the State. It would not be true that {196} Society is a State
only as actually exercising force; but it would perhaps be true to
say that State action as such, though far from being limited to
the downright exercise of force, yet consists of all that side of
social action which depends on the character of ultimate arbiter
and regulator, maintainer of mechanical routine, and source of
authoritative suggestion, a character which is one with the right to
exercise force in the last resort.



The end of the State, then, is the end of Society and of the
Individual--the best life, as determined by the fundamental logic
of the will. The means at its disposal, _qua_ State, always partake
of the nature of force, though this does not exclude their having
other aspects as well. Taxation may have the most reasonable and
even the most popular purpose, yet the generality and justice of
its incidence, and the certainty of its productiveness, can only be
secured by compulsion. No State could undertake its work on the basis
of voluntary contributions. A universal end, we might say, is indeed
not a mere general rule; but you cannot carry out a universal end in
a plurality of units--and a set of human individuals is always in one
aspect a plurality of units--without enforcing general rules.

4. Here, then, we have our problem more closely determined than in
the previous chapters. There we saw, in general, that self-government
can have no meaning unless we can ÒreallyÓ will something which we
do not always ÒactuallyÓ will. And we were led to look for a clue to
our real or implied will in the social spirit as incorporated in laws
and institutions, that is to say in Society as a {187} working whole
reflected in the full system of the consciousnesses which composed it.

We supposed ourselves prepared, then, it would seem, to do and
suffer anything which would promote the best life of the whole--that
maximisation of our being which, from the nature of our real will, we
saw to be imperative upon us--a demand implied in every volition and
from which we could never escape.

But now we are face to face with the question what we _are_ called
upon to do or to suffer, as members of a State, in promotion of
the best life. We have here to renew, from another standpoint, the
discussions of chapter iii. The governing fact of the situation is
that the means of action at our disposal as members of a State are
not, on their distinctive side, _in pari materia_ with the end. It
is true that the State, as an intelligent system, can appeal by
reasoning and persuasion to the logical will as such. It constantly
does so in various forms, and a State which did nothing of the kind
either directly or indirectly would not possess the recognition
which is necessary to its very existence. So far its work is _in
pari materia_ with the end, being a direct element in the expansion
of mind and character in their own spiritual medium of thought and
will. But this side of its work is not distinctive of the State,
and, therefore, is not that for which more particularly it exists.
Its distinctive attribute is to be ultimate arbiter and regulator
of claims, the guarantor of life as _at least_ a workable system
in the bodily world. It is in its ultimateness _de facto_ that the
differentia lies which separates it from the innumerable {188} other
groupings and associations which go to make up our complex life. This
is shown in the fact that each of us, as we have said, must belong
to a State, and can belong to one only. For an ultimate authority
must be single. Now, authority which is to be ultimate in a sphere
including the world of bodily action, must be an authority which
can use force. And it is for this reason that, as we said, force is
involved in the distinctive attributes of the State.

But force is not _in pari materia_ with the expansion of mind and
character in their spiritual medium. And, thus, there at once appears
an inadequacy of means to end as between the distinctive _modus
operandi_ of the State and the end in virtue of which it claims to
represent the ÒrealÓ will.

What is the bearing of this inadequacy? What is the most that the
State, in its distinctive capacity, can do towards promoting a form
of life which it recognises as desirable? Its direct power is limited
to securing the performance of external [1] actions. This does not
mean merely the performance of outward bodily movements, such as
might be brought to pass by actual physical force. It is remarkable
that actual physical force plays a very small part in the work of any
decently ordered State. When we say that the State can do no more
than secure the performance of external actions, we do not exclude
from the action the intention to act in a certain way. With out such
an intention there is no action in the sense of human action at all,
but merely a muscular movement. It is necessary for the State to
attach {189} importance to intention, which is involved in the idea
of human action, and is the only medium through which the muscular
movements of human beings can be determined with any degree of
certainty. The State, then, through its authority, backed ultimately
by physical force, can produce, with a fair degree of certainty,
the intention to act in a certain way, and therefore the actions
themselves. Why do we call intentional actions, so produced, external
actions only?



It is because the State is unable to determine that the action
shall be done from the ground or motive which alone would give it
immediate value or durable certainty as an element in the best life.
On the contrary, in so far as the doing of the action is due to the
distinctive mode of operation which belongs to the State, due, that
is to say, to the hope of reward or the fear of punishment, its value
as an element in the best life is _ipso facto_ destroyed, except in
so far as its ulterior effects are concerned. An action performed in
this sense under compulsion is not a true part of the will. [1] It is
an intention adopted from submissiveness or selfishness, and lacks
not only the moral value, but what is partly the same thing, the
reliable constancy of principle, displayed in an action which arises
out of the permanent purposes of a life.


The State, then, as such, can only secure the performance of external
actions. That is to say, it can only enforce as much intention [1]
as is {190} necessary to ensure, on the whole, compliance with
requirements stated in terms of movements affecting the outer world.
So far from promoting the performance of actions which enter into the
best life, its operations, where effective, must directly narrow the
area of such actions by stimulating lower motives as regards some
portion of it.


5. The State, then, in its distinctive capacity, has no agency at its
command for influencing conduct, but such as may be used to produce
an external course of behaviour by the injunction or prohibition of
external acts, in enforcing which acts the State will take note of
intentions, so far as it can infer them, because it is only through
them that its influence can be exerted.

The relation of such a means to the imperative end, on which we have
seen that political obligation depends, must be in a certain sense
negative. The means is one which cannot directly promote the end,
and which even tends to narrow its sphere. What it can effect is to
remove obstacles, to destroy conditions hostile to the realisation
of the end. This brings us back to a principle laid down by Kant,
[1] and in its bare statement strongly resembling MillÕs contention.
When force is opposed to {191} freedom, a force that repels that
force is right. Here, of course, all depends upon what we mean by
freedom, and in what sense we think that force can hinder hindrances
to it. If freedom meant for us the empty hexagon [2] round each
individual, the principle would take us back to MillÕs Liberty. If,
on the other hand, we failed to grasp the discrepancy between force
of any kind and the positive nature of the common good which we take
to be freedom, the principle would lead us straight to a machine-made
Utopia. For its negative character cannot restrain it from some
degree of positive action. It is only through positive operation
that a negation or opposition can find reality in the world. And the
limits of its positive action must depend on the precise bearings of
the negation which it puts in force.


Now, for us, after the explanations which have been given, the
negative nature of our principle is to be seriously pressed, although
its action has to take positive form. The State is in its right when
it forcibly hinders hindrance to the best life or common good. In
hindering such hindrances it will indeed do positive acts. It may
try to hinder illiteracy and intemperance by compelling education
and by municipalising the liquor traffic. Why not, it will be asked,
hinder also unemployment by universal employment, over-crowding by
universal house-building, and immorality by punishing immoral and
rewarding moral actions? Here comes the value of remembering that,
according to our principle, State action is negative in its immediate
bearing, though positive both in its {192} actual doings and its
ultimate purpose. On every problem the question must recur, ÒIs the
proposed measure _bona fide_ confined to hindering a hindrance, or
is it attempting direct promotion of the common good by force?Ó For
it is to be borne in mind throughout that whatever acts are enforced
are, so far as the force operates, withdrawn from the higher life.
The promotion of morality by force, for instance, is an absolute
self-contradiction. [1] No general principle will tell us how in
particular to solve this subtle question, apart from common sense
and special experience. But there is perhaps more to be learned from
this principle, if approached with _bona fides_ [2] than from most
generalities of philosophy on social or ethical topics. It is well,
I think, constantly to apply the idea of removing hindrances, in
criticism of our efforts to promote the best life by means involving
compulsion. We ought, as a rule, when we propose action involving
compulsion, to be able to show a definite tendency to growth, or
a definite reserve of capacity, which is frustrated by a known
impediment, the removal of which is a small matter compared to the
capacities to be set free. [3] For it should be remarked that {193}
every act done by the public power has one aspect of encroachment,
however slight, on the sphere of character and intelligence, if only
by using funds raised by taxation, or by introducing an automatic
arrangement into life. It can, therefore, only be justified if it
liberates resources of character and intelligence greater beyond all
question than the encroachment which it involves. This relation is
altogether perversely presented, as we saw above, if it is treated as
an encroachment of society upon individuals. All this is beside the
mark. The serious point is, that it is an interference, _so far as
compulsion operates in it_, of one type of action with another and
higher type of action; of automatism, so to speak, with intelligent
volition. The higher type of action, the embodiment of the common
good in logical growth, is so far from being merely individual as
opposed to social, that it is the whole end and purpose in the name
of which allegiance to society can be demanded from any individual.
As in the private so in the general life, every encroachment of
automatism must be justified by opening new possibilities to
self-conscious development, if it is not to mean degeneration and
senility.


It is the same principle in other words which Green lays down when
he says in effect [1] that only such acts (or omissions) should be
enforced by the public power as it is better should take place {194}
from any motive whatever than not take place at all. When, that is,
we enforce an act (or omission) by law, we should be prepared to
say, Ògranting that this act, which might conceivably have come to
be done from a sense of duty, now may come to be done for the most
part from a fear of punishment, or from a mechanical tendency to
submit to external rules (attended by the practical inconveniences of
insensibility, half-heartedness, and evasion which attach to acts so
enforced), still so much depends, for the higher life of the people,
upon the external conditions at stake, that we think it worth while
to enforce the act (or omission) though our eyes are fully open to
the risk of extended automatism.Ó


Here we may have to meet our own arguments against Mill. ÒYou said
it was a contradiction,Ó we shall be told, Òto admit coercion as a
means to liberty. But here you are advocating coercion as a means to
something as incompatible with it, in so far as it is operative, as
our Ôliberty,Õ viz., a certain state of mind and will. If the area of
coercion is necessarily subtracted from the area of liberty, as you
argued above, is not the area of coercion necessarily subtracted from
that to be occupied by the desired growth of will and character?Ó

The answer depends, as we indicated in ch. iii., on the difference
between bare liberty and a determinate growth. If your liberty is
wholly indeterminate, then every restraint is a reduction of it. You
cannot increase a quantity which is all of one kind by taking away
a part of it. And, in fact, the idea that there was or could have
{195} been a previous general liberty, of which a part was given up
in exchange for more, is a mere illusion. Liberty has grown up within
the positive determinations of life, as they have expanded and come
to fit mankind better.

But if the quantity to be increased is a determinate growth, of a
type whose general character is known, the problem is transformed.
It is the commonest of experiences that hindrances can be removed
and favourable conditions maintained, if this has to be done, not
with a view to every conceivable and inconceivable development,
but for a growth the general line of which is known. In this case,
as the whole expands, the restraints and the liberty, the room for
action, may even increase together. [1] This is not only true in
universal theory, but much more important than is always remembered
in special theory or practice. The possibility of promoting freedom
or well-being by compulsion depends very greatly indeed on the unity
of habit and experience which binds together a single community.
The more the life has in common, the more definite and automatic
arrangements you may safely make in promotion of it. The rules of my
household, which inconvenience its members no more than their clothes
do, would produce a rebellion if they were enforced by law even
throughout our village.


Thus, then, we may maintain our principle of the limits of
distinctive State action. The peculiarity of it is that it allows
of positive acts and interferences, motived by an ultimate positive
{196} purpose, but with a bearing on that purpose which is primarily
negative or indirect. However positive, as actual facts, are the
conditions which it may become advisable to maintain, they may
always, on the side which is distinctively due to State compulsion,
be regarded as the hindrance of hindrances. And the _bona-fide_
application of this principle will really be, when aided by special
experience, in some degree a valuable clue to what ought to be done.
It is only putting in other words the rule of action followed by all
practical men in matters of which they have genuine experience. We
may think, for instance, of the problem involved in State maintenance
of universities. It is easy to vote money, to build buildings, and
to pass statutes. But none of these things will secure the objects
of a university. Money and buildings and statutes may throw open an
arena, so to speak, for the work of willing minds in learning and
education. But the work itself is in a different medium from anything
which can be produced by compulsion, and is so far less vital as it
is conditioned by the operation of force upon minds which demand no
work of the kind.

But here we meet a difficulty of principle. Do we say that no
external conditions are more than hindrances of hindrances to the
best life? Do we deny that the best life can be positively promoted
by external conditions; or if we admit this, do we still deny that it
can be positively promoted by the work of the State? The answer has
already been implied, but may be explicitly restated. We refused [1]
to separate mind from its embodiment in {197} material things, and
so to be drawn into a purely inward theory of morality, It would be
exaggeration to call such external conditions as, _e.g_., first-rate
educational apparatus, [2] mere negative conditions of the best life.
But then, we are now asked, cannot the State supply such external
conditions by expenditure compulsorily provided for, and if so, is
not our principle destroyed, viz., the limitation of State action to
the hindrance of hindrances?


The difficulty springs from the fact, that the State, as using
compulsion, is only one side of Society, and its action is only
one side of social action. If first-rate educational apparatus is
called into existence by a State endowment, the first-rateness of the
apparatus is not due to the compulsion applied to taxpayers, which
rather, so far, negatives the action of intelligent will as such. But
it must be due, in one way or another, to the fact that first-rate
ability in the way of devising apparatus was somewhere pressing for
an outlet, which, by a stroke of the pickaxe, so to speak, the public
power was able to provide for it. We must not confuse the element of
compulsion, which is the side of social action distinctly belonging
to State interference, with the whole of the material results which
liberated intelligence produces. When we say, then, that the State as
such can do nothing for the best life but hinder hindrances to it,
the principle applies in the strictest sense only to the compulsory
or automatic side of State action, which {198} must, so to speak, be
reckoned against it [1] in comparing its products with those which
are spontaneous social growths throughout.


But it is further true that material conditions which come close to
life, such as houses, wages, educational apparatus, do not wholly
escape our principle. They occupy a very interesting middle region
between mere hindrances of hindrances and the actual stimulation
of mind and will. On the one side they are charged with mind and
character, and so far are actual elements in the best life. On the
other side they depend on external actions, and therefore seem
accessible to State compulsion, which extends to all external
doings and omissions. But what we have to observe is, and it is in
practice most important, that, _as charged with mind and will_,
these material facts may not be accessible to State compulsion,
while, _as accessible to State compulsion_ pure and simple, they
may forfeit their character of being charged with mind and will.
This shows itself in two ways. First, just because they are facts
of a kind which come so close to life (in other words depend so
greatly upon being charged with mind and will), State compulsion
cannot with certainty secure even their apparent existence. They
fail bodily, like human beings, if there is no spirit to keep them
alive. The relation of wages to the standard of life illustrates this
point. Secondly, supposing that for a time, by herculean efforts of
compulsion, which must call active intelligence to its aid, such
facts are made to present a satisfactory appearance of existence,
none the less, {199} so far as they are characterised by compulsion,
they may lose their character as elements in the best life. That
is to say, they may fail to benefit those whom they are meant to
benefit. The fact may fail to be absorbed in the life.

The principle of the hindrance of hindrances is most valuable and
luminous when rightly grasped, just in these middle cases. A pretty
and healthy house, which its inhabitant is fond of, is an element in
the best life. Who could doubt it who knows what home-life is? But
in order that putting a family out of a bad house into a good one
should give rise to such an element of the best life, it is strictly
and precisely necessary that the case or policy should come under our
principle. That is to say, unless there was a better life struggling
to utter itself, and the deadlift of interference just removed an
obstacle which bound it down, the good house will not be an element
in a better life, and the encroachment on the ground of volition will
have been made with out compensation--a fact which may show itself in
many fatal ways. If, on the other hand, the struggling tendency to a
better life has power [1] to effect the change without the deadlift
from outside, then the result is certain and wholly to the good.


Thus we may say that every law and institution, every external fact
maintained by the public power, must be judged by the degree in which
it sets at liberty a growth of mind and spirit. It is a {200} problem
partly of removing obstacles to growth, and partly of the division of
labour between consciousness and automatism.

It ought to occur to the reader that the ground here assigned for
the limitation of State action--that is, of social action through
the public power--is not _prima facie_ in harmony with the account
of political obligation, according to which laws and institutions
represented a real self or general will, recognised by individuals
as implied in the common good which was imperative upon them. We
spoke, for example, of being forced to be free, and of the system of
law and order as representing the higher self. And yet we are now
saying that, in as far as force is operative through compulsion and
authoritative suggestion, it is a means which can only reach its end
through a negation.

But this _prima-facie_ contradiction is really a proof of the
vitality of our principle. It follows from the fact that we
accept self-government in the full strength of both its factors,
and can deal with it on this basis. The social system under
which we live, taking it as one which does not demand immediate
revolution, represents the general will and higher self as a whole
to the community as a whole, and can only stand by virtue of that
representation being recognised. Our loyalty to it makes us men and
citizens, and is the main spiritualising force of our lives. But
something in all of us, and much in some of us, is recalcitrant
through rebellion, indolence, incompetence, or ignorance. And it
is only on these elements that the public power operates as power,
through compulsion {201} or authoritative suggestion. Thus, the
general will when it meets us as force, and authority resting on
force, and not as a social obligation which we spontaneously rise
to accept, comes to us _ex hypothesi_ as something which claims
to be ourself, but which, for the moment, we more or less fail
to recognise. And, according to the adjustment between it and
our complex and largely unintelligent self, it may abandon us to
automatism, or stir in us rebellion or recognition, and so may
hinder the fuller life in us or remove hindrances to it. It seems
worth while to distinguish two main cases of the relation between
the ordinary self and the general will. One of these cases covers
the whole of our every-day law-abiding life, in its grades of active
loyalty, acceptance of suggestion, and automatic acquiescence; and
consists of the relation of our ordinary self to the general system
of rights maintained by the State as ultimate regulator and arbiter.
The other is confined to more exceptional situations, and has to
do with collision between the particular and the general will, as
treated in the theory of punishment. The subject of reward may be
mentioned at the same time, if only to show why it is almost an empty
heading in political theory. We will end this chapter, therefore,
with a general account of the system of rights and of reward and
punishment.

6. The idea of individual rights comes down to us from the doctrine
of natural right, and has generally been discussed with reference to
it. We need not now go back upon the illusions connected with the
notion of natural right. It is enough if we bear in mind that we
inherit from it the important {202} idea of a positive law which is
what it ought to be. A right, [1] then, has both a legal and a moral
reference. It is a claim which can be enforced at law, which no moral
imperative can be; but it is also recognised to be a claim which
ought to be capable of enforcement at law, and thus it has a moral
aspect. The case in which positive enactment and the moral ÒoughtÓ
appear to diverge will be considered below. But a typical ÒrightÓ
unites the two sides. It both is, and ought to be, capable of being
enforced at law.


Its peculiar position follows from what we have seen to be the end
of the State, and the means at its disposal. The end of the State
is a moral purpose, imperative on its members. But its distinctive
action is restricted to removing hindrances to the end, that is,
to lending its force to overcome--both in mind and in externals
essential to mind--obstacles which otherwise would obstruct the
realisation of the end. The whole of the conditions thus enforced
is the whole of ÒrightsÓ attaching to the selves, who, standing in
definite relations, constitute the community. For it is in these
selves that the end of the State is real, and it is by maintaining
and regulating their claims to the removal of obstructions that the
State is able to promote the end for which it exists. Rights then are
claims recognised by the State, _i.e._ by Society acting as ultimate
authority, to the maintenance of conditions favourable to the best
life. And if we ask in general for a definition and limitation of
State action as such, the answer is, in a simple {203} phrase, that
State action is coincident with the maintenance of rights.

The system of rights which the State maintains may be regarded from
different points of view.

First, _(a)_ from the point of view of the whole community, that is,
as the general result in the promotion of good life obtained by the
working of a free Society, as a statesman or outside critic might
regard it. Thus looked at, the system of rights may be described
as Òthe organic whole of the outward conditions necessary to the
rational life,Ó or Òthat which is really necessary to the maintenance
of material conditions essential to the existence and perfection of
human personality.Ó [1] This point of view is essential as a full
contradiction of that uncritical conception by which rights are
regarded as something with which the individual is invested in his
aspect of isolation, and independently of his relation to the end.
It forces us away from this false particularisation, and compels us
to consider the whole State-maintained order in its connectedness as
a single expression of a common good or will, in so far as such a
good can find utterance in a system of external acts and habits. And
it enables us to weigh the value which belongs to the maintenance of
any tolerable social order, simply because it is an order, and so
far enables life to be lived, and a determinate, if limited, common
good to be realised. From other points of view we are apt to neglect
this characteristic, and to forget {204} how great is the effect,
for the possibilities of life throughout, of the mere fact that a
social order exists. Hegel observes that a man thinks it a matter of
course that he goes back to his house after night-fall in security.
He does not reflect to what he owes it. Yet this very naturalness, so
to speak, of living in a social order is perhaps the most important
foundation which the State can furnish to the better life. Ò_Si
monumentum quaeris, circumspice_Ó If we ask how it affects our will,
the answer is that it forms our world. Speaking broadly, the members
of a civilised community have seen nothing but order in their lives,
and could not accommodate their action to anything else.



It should be mentioned as a danger of this point of view that,
fascinated by the spectacle of the social fabric as a whole, we may
fail to distinguish what in it is the mere maintenance of rights,
and what is the growth which such maintenance can promote but cannot
constitute. Thus we may lose all idea of the true limits of State
action.

_(b)_ We may regard this complex of rights from the standpoint of
the selves or persons who compose the community. It is in these
selves, as we have seen, that the social good is actual, and it is
to their differentiated functions, [1] which constitute their life
and the end of the community, that the sub-groupings of rights, or
conditions of good life, have to be adjusted each to each like suits
of clothes. The rights are, from this point of view, primarily the
external incidents, so far as maintained by law--the authoritative
vesture as it were--of a {205} personÕs position in the world of his
community. And we shall do well to regard the nature of rights, as
attaching to selves or persons, from this point of view of a place
or position in the order determined by law. It has been argued, I
do not know with what justice, that, in considering the relations
of particles in space, the proper course would be to regard their
positions or distances from each other as the primary fact, and to
treat attributions of attractive and repulsive forces as modes of
expressing the maintenance of the necessary positions rather than
as descriptive of real causes which bring it about. At least, it
appears to me, such a conception may well be applied to the relative
ideas of right and obligation. What comes first, we may say, is the
position, the place or places, function or functions, determined by
the nature of the best life as displayed in a certain community, and
the capacity of the individual self for a unique contribution to
that best life. Such places and functions are imperative; they are
the fuller self in the particular person, and make up the particular
person as he passes into the fuller self. His hold on this is his
true will, in other words, his apprehension of the general will. Such
a way of speaking may seem unreally simplified when we look at the
myriad relations of modern life and the sort of abstraction by which
the individual is apt to become a rolling stone with no assignable
place--indeed Ògathering no mossÓ--and to pass through his positions
and relations as if they were stations on a railway journey. But in
truth it is only simplified and not falsified. If we look with care
we shall see that it, or nothing, is true of all lives.


{206} The Position, then, is the real fact--the vocation, place or
function, which is simply one reading of the personÕs actual self and
relations in the world in which he lives. Having thoroughly grasped
this primary fact, we can readily deal with the points of view which
present the position or its incidents in the partial aspects of
rights or obligations.

(i.) A right, we said, is a _claim_ recognised by society and
enforced by the State. My place or position, then, and its incidents,
so far as sanctioned by the State, constitute my rights, when thought
of as something which I claim, or regard as powers instrumental to
my purposes. A right thus regarded is not anything primary. It is
a way of looking at certain conditions, which, by reason of their
relation to the end of the whole as manifested in me, are imperative
alike for me and for others. It is, further, the particular way of
looking at these conditions which is in question when I claim them or
am presumed to claim them, as powers secured to me with a view to an
end which I accept as mine. I _have_ the rights no less in virtue of
my presumed capacity for the end, if I am in fact indifferent to the
end. But, in this case, though attributed _ab extra_ as rights, they
tend to pass into obligations.

(ii.) If rights are an imperative ÒpositionÓ or function, when looked
at as a group of State-secured powers claimed by a person for a
certain end, obligations are the opposite aspect of such a position
or group of powers. That is to say, the conditions of a ÒpositionÓ
are regarded as obligations in as far as they are thought of as {207}
requiring enforcement, and therefore, primarily, from the point of
view of persons not directly identified with the ÒpositionÓ or end
to which they are instrumental. Rights are claimed, obligations
are owed. And _prima-facie_ rights are claimed _by_ a person, and
obligations are owed _to_ a person, being his rights as regarded by
those against whom they are enforceable.

Thus, the distinction of self and others, which we refused to take
as the basis of society, makes itself prominent in the region of
compulsion. The reason is that compulsion is confined to hindering
or producing external acts, and is excluded from producing an act in
its relation to a moral end, that is, the exercise of a right in its
true sense; though it can enforce an act which in fact favours the
possibility of acting towards a moral end that is, an obligation.
This is the same thing as saying that normally a right is what _I_
claim, and the obligation relative to it is what _you_ owe; as an
obligation is that which can be enforced, and that is an act or
omission apart from the willing of an end; and a right involves what
cannot be enforced, viz., the relation of an act to an end in a
personÕs will. But even here the distinction of self and others is
hardly ultimate. The obligation on me to maintain my parents becomes
almost a right [1] if I claim the task as {208} a privilege. And
many rights of my position may actually be erected into, or more
commonly may give rise to, obligations incumbent on me for the sake
of my position or function. If the exercise of the franchise were
made compulsory that would be a right treated also as an obligation;
but it might be urged that _qua_ obligation it was held due to the
position of others, and only _qua_ right to my own Òposition.Ó But if
the law interferes with my poisoning myself [2] either by drains or
with alcohol, that, I presume, is the enforcement of an obligation
arising out of my own position and function as a man and a citizen,
which makes reasonable care for my life imperative upon me.


_(c)_ It is commonly said that every right implies a duty. This has
two meanings, which should be distinguished.

In the one case, (i.) for ÒdutyÓ should be read Òobligation,Ó _i.e._
a demand enforceable by law. This simply means that every ÒpositionÓ
may be regarded as involving either powers secured or conditions
enforced, which are one and the same thing differently looked at.
Roughly speaking, they are the same thing as differently looked at
by one person, and by other persons. My right {209} to walk along
the high road involves an obligation upon all other persons not to
obstruct me, and in the last resort the State will send horse, foot
and artillery rather than let me be causelessly obstructed in walking
along the high road.

It is also true that every position which can be the source of
obligations enforceable in favour of my rights is likewise a link
with obligations enforceable on me in favour of the rights of others.
By claiming a right in virtue of my position I recognise and testify
to the general system of law according to which I am reciprocally
under obligation to respect the rights, or rather the function
and position, of others. My rights then imply obligations both in
others, and perhaps in myself, correlative to these rights, and
in me correlative to the rights of others. But it cannot strictly
be said that the obligations are the source of the rights, or the
rights of the obligations. Both are the varied external conditions of
ÒpositionsÓ as regarded from different points of view.

But (ii.) there is a different sense in which every right implies a
duty. And this, the true meaning of the phrase, is involved in what
we have said of the nature of a Òposition.Ó All rights, as claims
which both are and ought to be enforceable by law, derive their
imperative authority from their relation to an end which enters into
the better life. All rights, then, are powers instrumental to making
the best of human capacities, and can only be recognised or exercised
upon this ground.

In this sense, the duty is the purpose with a view to which the
right is secured, and not merely {210} a corresponding obligation
equally derived from a common ground; and the right and duty are not
distinguished as something claimed by self and something owed to
others, but the duty as an imperative purpose, and the right as a
power secured because instrumental to it.

_(d)_ We have treated rights throughout as claims, the enforcement
of which by the State is merely the climax of their recognition by
society. Why do we thus demand recognition for rights? If we deny
that there can be unrecognised rights, do we not surrender human
freedom to despotism or to popular caprice?

(i.) In dealing with the general question why recognition is
demanded as an essential of rights, we must remember what we took
to be the nature of society and the source of obligation. We
conceived a society to be a structure of intelligences so related
as to co-operate with and to imply one another. We took the source
of obligation to lie in the fact that the logic of the whole is
operative in every part, and consequently that every part has a
reality which goes beyond its average self, and identifies it with
the whole, making demands upon it in doing so.

Now, we are said to ÒrecogniseÓ anything when it comes to us with a
consciousness of familiarity, as something in which we feel at home.
And this is our general attitude to the demands which the logic of
the whole, implied in our every act, is continuously making upon
us. It is involved in the interdependence of minds, which has been
explained to constitute _the mind_ of which the visible community
is the body. A teacherÕs {211} behaviour towards his pupils, for
example, implies a certain special kind of interdependence between
their minds. What he can do for them is conditioned by what they
expect of him and are ready to do for him, and _vice versa_. The
relation of each to the other is a special form of Òrecognition.Ó
That is to say, the mind of each has a definite and positive attitude
towards that of the other, which is based on, or rather, so far as it
goes, simply _is_, the relation of their ÒpositionsÓ to each other.
Thus, social positions or vocations actually have their being in the
medium of recognition. They _are_ the attitudes of minds towards one
another, through which their several distinct characteristics are
instrumental to a common good.

Thus, then, a right, being a power secured in order to fill a
position, is simply a part of the fact that such a position is
recognised as instrumental to the common good. It is impossible to
argue that the position may exist, and not be recognised. For we
are speaking of a relation of minds, and, in so far as minds are
united into a single system by their attitudes towards each other,
their ÒpositionsÓ and the recognition of them are one and the same
thing. Their attitude, receptive, co-operative, tolerant, and the
like, is so far a recognition, though not necessarily a reflective
recognition. Probably this is what is intended by those who speak of
imitation or other analogous principles as the ultimate social fact.
They do not mean the repetition of another personÕs conduct, though
that may enter in part into the relation of interdependence. They
mean the {212} conscious adoption [1] of an attitude towards others,
embodying the relations between the ÒpositionsÓ which social logic
assigns to each.


(ii.) But then the question of page 210 presses upon us ÒIf we deny
that there can be unrecognised rights, do we not surrender human
freedom to despotism or to popular caprice?Ó

The sting of this suggestion is taken out when we thoroughly grasp
the idea that recognition is a matter of logic, working on and
through experience, and not of choice or fancy. If my mind has _no_
attitude to yours, there is no interdependence and I cannot be a
party to securing you rights. You are not, for me, a sharer in a
capacity for a common good, which each of us inevitably respects.
A dog or a tree may be an instrument to the good life, and it may
therefore be right to treat it in a certain way, but it cannot be
a subject of rights. If my mind _has_ an attitude to yours, then
there is certainly a recognition between us, and the nature of
that recognition and what it involves are matters for reasoning
and for the appeal to experience. It is idle for me, for instance,
to communicate with you by language or to buy and sell with you,
perhaps even idle to go to war with you, [1] and still to say that
I recognise no capacity in you for a common good. My behaviour is
then inconsistent with itself, and the question takes the form what
rights are involved {213} in the recognition of you which experience
demonstrates. No person and no society is consistent with itself, and
the proof and amendment of their inconsistency is always possible.
And, one inconsistency being amended, the path is opened to progress
by the emergence of another. If slaves come to be recognised as free
but not as citizens, this of itself opens a road by which the new
freeman may make good his claim that it is an inconsistency not to
recognise him as a citizen.


But no right can be founded on my mere desire to do what I like. [1]
The wish for this is the sting of the claim to unrecognised rights,
and this wish is to be met, as the fear that our view might lead
to despotism was met. The matter is one of fact and logic, not of
fancies and wishes. If I desire to assert an unrecognised right, I
must show what ÒpositionÓ involves it, and how that position asserts
itself in the system of recognitions which is the social mind, and my
point can only be established universally with regard to a certain
type of position, and not merely for myself as a particular A or B.
In other words, I must show that the alleged right is a requirement
of the realisation of capacities for good, and, further, that it
does not demand a sacrifice of capacities now being realised, out
of proportion to the capacities which it would enable to assert
themselves. I must show, in short, that in so far as the claim in
question is not secured by the State, Society is inconsistent with
itself, and falls short of being what it professes to be, an organ
of good life. And all my showing gives no _right_, till it has
{214} modified the law. To maintain a right against the State by
force or disobedience is rebellion, and, in considering the duty of
rebellion, we have to set the whole value of the existence of social
order against the importance of the matter in which we think Society
defective. There can hardly be a duty to rebellion in a State in
which law can be altered by constitutional process.


The State-maintained system of rights, then, in its relation to the
normal self and will of ordinary citizens with their varying moods of
enthusiasm and indolence, may be compared to the automatic action of
a human body. Automatic actions are such as we perform in walking,
eating, dressing, playing the piano or riding the bicycle. They have
been formed by consciousness, and are of a character subservient to
its purposes, and obedient to its signals. As a rule, they demand
no effort of attention, and in this way attention is economised
and enabled to devote itself to problems which demand its intenser
efforts. They are relegated to automatism because they are uniform,
necessary, and external--ÒexternalÓ in the sense explained above,
that the way in which they are required makes it enough if they are
done, whatever their motives, or with no motives at all.

By far the greater bulk of the system of rights is related in this
way to normal consciousness. We may pay taxes, abstain from fraud and
assault, use the roads and the post-office, and enjoy our general
security, without knowing that we are doing or enjoying anything that
demands special attention. Partly, of course, attention is being
given by other consciousnesses to maintaining the securities and
{215} facilities of our life. Even so, the arrangement is automatic
in so far as there is no reason for arousing the general attention in
respect to it; but to a varying extent it is automatic throughout,
and engrained in the system and habits of the whole people. We are
all supposed to know the whole law. Not even a judge has it all in
his knowledge at any one time; but the meaning is that it roughly
expresses our habits, and we live according to it without great
difficulty, and expect each other to do so. This automatism is not
harmful, but absolutely right and necessary, so long as we relegate
to it only ÒexternalÓ matters; _i.e._ such as are necessary to be
done, motive or no motive, in some way which can be generally laid
down. Thus used, it is an indispensable condition of progress. It
represents the ground won and settled by our civilisation, and leaves
us free to think and will such matters as have their value in and
through being thought and willed rightly. If we try to relegate these
to automatism, then moral and intellectual death has set in.

But if the system of rights is automatic, how can it rest on
recognition? Automatic actions, we must remember, are still of a
texture, so to speak, continuous with consciousness. ÒRecognitionÓ
expresses very fairly our habitual attitude towards them in ourselves
and others. We might think, for example, of the system of habits and
expectations which forms our household routine. We go through it
for the most part automatically, while ÒrecognisingÓ the ÒpositionÓ
of those who share it with us, and respecting the life which is its
end. At points here and there in which it {216} affects the deeper
possibilities of our being, our attention becomes active, and we
assert our position with enthusiasm and conscientiousness. Our
attitude to the social system of rights is something like this. The
whole order has our habitual recognition; we are aware of and respect
more or less the imperative end on which it rests--the claim of a
common good upon us all. Within the framework of this order there is
room for all degrees of laxity and conscientiousness; but, in any
case, it is only at certain points, which either concern our special
capacity or demand readjustment in the general interest, that intense
active attention is possible or desirable.

The view here taken of automatism and attention in the social whole
impairs neither the unity of intelligence throughout society nor
the individualÕs recognition of this unity as a self liable to be
opposed to his usual self. As to the former point, every individual
mind shows exactly the same phenomena, of a _continuum_ largely
automatic, and thoroughly alive only in certain regions, connected,
but not thoroughly coherent. As to the latter point, permeation of
the individual by the habits of social automatism does not prevent,
but rather gives material for, his tendency to abstract himself from
the whole, and to frame an attitude for himself inconsistent with his
true Òposition,Ó against which tendency the imperative recognition of
his true self has constantly to be exerted.

7. We have finally to deal with the actual application by the State
of its ultimate resource for the maintenance of rights, viz., force.
Superior force may be exercised upon human nature both {217} by
rewards and by punishments. In both respects its exercise by the
State would fall generally within the lines of automatism; that is
to say, it would be a case of the promotion of an end by means other
than the influence of an idea of that end upon the will. But, owing
to the subtle continuity of human nature throughout all its phases,
we shall find that there is something more than this to be said, and
that the idea of the end is operative in a peculiar way just where
the agencies that promote it appear to be most alien and mechanical.
In so far as this is the case, the general theory of the negative
character of State action has to be modified, as we foresaw, [1] by
the theory of punishment. _Prima facie_, however, it is true that
reward and punishment belong to the automatic element of social life.
They arise in no direct relation of the will to the end. They are a
reaction of the automatic system, instrumental to the end, against
a friction or obstacle which intrudes upon it, or (in the case of
rewards) upon the opposite of a friction or obstacle. There is no
object in pressing a comparison into every detail; but perhaps, as
social and individual automatism do really bear the same kind of
relation to consciousness, it may be pointed out that reward and
punishment correspond in some degree to the pleasures and pains of a
high-class secondary automatism, say of riding or of reading, _i.e._
of something specially conducive to enhanced life. Such activities
bring pleasure when unimpeded, and pain when sharply interrupted
by a start or blunder which jars upon us. Putting this latter case
in language which {218} carries out the analogy to punishment,
we might say that the formed habit of action, unconsciously or
semi-consciously relevant to the end or fuller life, is obstructed by
some partial start of mind, and their conflict is accompanied with
recognition, pain, and vexation. ÒWhat a fool I was,Ó we exclaim, Òto
ride carelessly at that corner,Ó or Òto let that plan for a holiday
interrupt me in my morningÕs reading.Ó



It may seem remarkable that reward plays a small and apparently
decreasing part in the self-management of society by the public
power. To the na•ve Athenian, [1] it seemed a natural instrument for
the encouragement of public spirit, probably rather by a want of
discrimination between motives than by a real belief in political
selfishness. In European countries honours still appear to play a
considerable part, but on analysis it would be found less than it
seems. Partly they are recognitions of important functions, and
thus conditions rather than rewards. To a great extent, again, they
recognise existing facts, and are rather consequences of the respect
which society feels for certain types of life (with very curious
results in regions where the general mind is inexperienced, _e.g._ in
fine art) than means employed to regulate the conduct of citizens.
We should think a soldier mean whose aim was a peerage, still more a
poet or an artist. I hardly know that rewards adjudged by the State,
as distinct from compensations, exist {219} in the United States
of America. [2] Rewards then fill no place correlative to that of
punishments, and the reason seems plain. Punishment corresponds much
better to the negative method which alone is open to the State for
the maintenance of rights. For Punishment proclaims its negative
character, and no one can suppose it laudable simply to be deterred
from wrong-doing by fear of punishment. But though precisely the same
principle applies to meritorious actions done with a view to reward,
an illusion is almost certain to arise which will hide the principle
in this case. For, if reward is largely used as an inducement to
actions conducive to the best life, it is almost certain that it
will be used as an inducement to actions, the value and certainty of
which depend on the state of will to which they are due. And then the
distinction between getting them done, motive or no motive, which
is the true region of State action, and their being done with a
certain motive, which is necessary to give them either practical or
moral value, is pretty sure to be obliterated, and the range of the
moral will trenched upon in its higher portion and with a constant
tendency to self-deception. [3] {220} It is the same truth in other
words when we point out that taking reward and punishment, as
interferences, only to deal with exceptional cases, reward would deal
with the exceptionally good. Therefore, again, reward must either
make an impossible attempt to deal with all the normal as good, which
involves the danger of _de_-moralising the whole of normal life,
or must take the line of specially promoting what is exceptionally
conducive to good life; in which case confusion is certain to arise
from interference with the delicate middle class of external actions
analysed above. [4] And thus it is only what we should expect when
we find that States having no _damnosa hereditas_ of a craving for
personal honours are hardly acquainted with the bestowal of rewards
by the public power.


It will be sufficient, then, to complete the account of State action
in maintenance of rights by some account of the nature and principles
of punishment.

And we may profitably begin by recalling M. DurkheimÕs suggestion,
which was mentioned in a former chapter. [1] Punishment, he observes,
from the simplest and most actual point of view, includes in itself
all those sides which theory has tended to regard as incompatible.
It is, in essence, simply the reaction of a strong and determinate
collective sentiment against an act which offends it. It is idle
to include such a reaction entirely under the head either of
reformation, or of retaliation, or of prevention. An aggression is
_ipso facto_ a sign of character, an injury, and a menace; and the
reaction against it is equally _ipso facto_ an attempt {221} to
affect character, a retaliation against an injury, and a deterrent
or preventive against a menace. When we fire up at aggression it is
pretty much a chance whether we say ÒI am going to teach him better
manners,Ó or ÒI am going to serve him out,Ó or ÒI am going to see
that he doesnÕt do that again.Ó A consideration of each of these
aspects is necessary to do justice both to the theories and to the
facts.


i. An obvious point of view, and the first perhaps to appear in
philosophy, though strongly opposed to early law, is that the aim of
punishment is to make the offender good. As test of the adequacy of
this doctrine by itself, the question may be put, ÒIf pleasures would
cure the offender, ought he to be given pleasures?Ó The doctrine,
however, does not, by any means, altogether incline to leniency. For
it carries as a corollary the extirpation of the incurable, which
Plato proposes in a passage of singularly modern quality, when he
suggests the co-operation of judges and physicians in maintaining the
moral and physical health of society. [1]



The first comment that occurs to us is, that by a mere medical
treatment of the offender, including or consisting of pleasant
conditions, if helpful to his cure, the interest of society seems
to be disregarded. What is to become of the maintenance of rights,
if aggressors have to anticipate a pleasant or lenient ÒcureÓ? It
may be true that brutal punishments stimulate a criminal temper in
the people rather than check it; but it is a long way from this to
laying down that there is no need {222} for terror to be associated
with crime. To suppose that pleasures may simply act throughout as
pains, is playing with words and throws no light on the question.
If we leave words their meaning, we must say that punishment must
be deterrent for others as well as reformatory for the offender,
and therefore in some degree painful. It is true, however, that the
offender, as a human being, and presumably capable of a common good,
has, as Green puts it, Òreversionary rightsÓ of humanity, and these,
punishment must so far as possible respect.

But there is a deeper difficulty. If the reformation theory is to be
seriously distinguished from the other theories of punishment, it has
a meaning which is unjust to the offender himself. It implies that
his offence is a merely natural evil, like disease, and can be cured
by therapeutic treatment directed to removing its causes. But this
is to treat him not as a human being; to treat him as a Òpatient,Ó
not as an agent; to exclude him from the general recognition that
makes us men. (If the therapeutic treatment includes a recognition
and chastisement of the offenderÕs bad will [1]--the form of which
chastisement may, of course, be very variously modified--then
there is no longer anything to distinguish the reformatory theory
from other theories of punishment.) It has been lately pointed out
[2] what a confusion is involved in the claim that beings, who
are irresponsible and so incapable of guilt, are therefore in the
strict sense innocent. Here are the true objects {223} for a pure
reformatory theory. Here that may freely be done, as to creatures
incapable of rights, which is kindest for them and safest for
society, from quasi-medical treatment to extirpation. There is no
guilt in them to demand punishment, but there is no human will in
them to have the rights of innocence.


But, applied to responsible human beings, such a theory, if really
kept to its distinctive contention, is an insult. It leads to the
notion that the State may take hold of any man, whose life or ideas
are thought capable of improvement, and set to work to ameliorate
them by forcible treatment. There is no true punishment except where
one is an offender against a system of rights which he shares, and
therefore against himself. And such an offender has a right to the
recognition of his hostile will; it is inhuman to treat him as a wild
animal or a child, whom we simply mould to our aims. Without such
a recognition, to be punished is not, according to the old Scotch
phrase, to be Òjustified.Ó

ii. The idea of retaliation or retribution, though in history the
oldest conception of punishment, [1] may be taken in theory as a
protest against the conception that punishment is only a means for
making a man better. Its strong point is its definite idea of the
offender. The offender is a responsible person, belonging to a
certain order which he recognises as entering into him and as entered
into by him, and he has made actual an intention hostile to this
order. He has, {224} as PlatoÕs Socrates insists in the _Crito_,
destroyed the order so far as in him lies. In other words, he has
violated the system of rights which the State exists to maintain,
and by which alone he and others are secured in the exercise of any
capacity for good, this security consisting in their reciprocal
respect for the system. His hostile will stands up and defies the
right, in so far as his personality is asserted, through a tangible
deed which embodies the wrong. It is necessary, then, that the power
which maintains the system of rights should not merely, if possible,
undo the external harm which has been done, but should strike down
the hostile will which has defied the right by doing that harm.
The end or true self is in the medium of mind and will, and is
contradicted and nullified so far as a hostile will is permitted to
triumph.


It is obvious, however, that the means by which the hostile will can
be negatived fall _prima facie_ within the region of automatism.
The recalcitrant element of consciousness is not susceptible to the
end as an idea, or it would not be recalcitrant. The end can here
assert itself, agreeably to the general principle of State action,
only through external action the mental effects of which cannot
be precisely estimated. It might, therefore, seem that the pain
produced by the reaction of the automatic system on the aberrant
consciousness--the punishment--was simply a natural pain, which might
act as a deterrent from aberration, but had no visible connection
with the true whole or end for the mind of the offender. We shall
speak below of the sense in which {225} punishment is deterrent or
preventive. But it is to be noted at this point that a high-class
secondary automatism, with which all along we have compared the
system of rights as engrained in the habits of a people, retains
a very close connection with consciousness. We do not indeed will
every step that we walk, but we only walk while we will to walk, and
so with the whole system of routine automatism which is the method
and organ of our daily life. At any interruption, any hindrance or
failure, consciousness starts up, and the end of the whole routine
comes sharply back upon us through our aberration.

So it is with punishment. Primarily, no doubt, chastisement by pain,
and the appeal to fear and to submissiveness, is effective through
our lower nature, and, in as far as operative, substitutes selfish
motives for the will that wills the good, and so narrows its sphere.
But there is more behind. The automatic system is pulsing with the
vitality of the end to which it is instrumental; and when we kick
against the pricks, and it reacts upon us in pain, this pain has
subtle connections throughout the whole of our being. It brings us
to our senses, as we say; that is, it suggests, more or less, a
consciousness of what the habitual system means, and of what we have
committed in offending against it. When one stumbles and hurts his
foot, he may look up and see that he is off the path. If a man is
told that the way he works his factory or keeps his tenement houses
is rendering him liable to fine or imprisonment, then, if he is an
ordinary, careless, but respectable citizen, he will feel some thing
of a shock, and recognise that he was getting {226} too neglectful
of the rights of others, and that, in being pulled up, he is brought
back to himself. His citizen honour will be touched. He will not like
to be below the average which the common conscience had embodied in
law.

When we come to the actual criminal consciousness, the form which
the recognition may take in fact may vary greatly; and as an extreme
there may be a furious hostility against the whole recognised
system of law, either involving self-outlawry through a despair of
reconciliation, or arising through some sort of habitual conspiracy
in which the man finds his chosen law and order as against that
recognised by the State. [1] But after all, we are dealing with a
question of social logic and not of empirical psychology. And it must
be laid down that, in as far as any sane man fails altogether to
recognise in any form the assertion of something which he normally
respects in the law which punishes him (putting aside what he takes
to be miscarriage of justice), he is outlawed by himself and the
essentials of citizenship are not in him. Doubtless, if an uneducated
man were told, in theoretical language, that in being punished for
an assault he was realising his own will, he would think it cruel
nonsense. But this is a mere question of language, and has really
nothing to do with the essential state of his consciousness. He would
understand perfectly well that he was being served as he would say
anyone should be served, whom he saw acting as he had done, in a case
where his own {227} passions were not engaged. And this recognition,
in whatever form it is admitted, carries the consequence which we
affirm.

In short, then, compulsion through punishment and the fear of it,
though primarily acting on the lower self, does tend, when the
conditions of true punishment exist (_i.e._ the reaction of a system
of rights violated by one who shares in it), to a recognition of the
end by the person punished, and may so far be regarded as his own
will, implied in the maintenance of a system to which he is a party,
returning upon himself in the form of pain. And this is the theory
of punishment as retributive. The test doctrine of the theory may be
found in KantÕs saying that, even though a society were about to be
dissolved by agreement, the last murderer in prison must be executed
before it breaks up. The punishment is, so to speak, his right, of
which he must not be defrauded.

There are two natural perversions of this theory.

The first is to confuse the necessary retribution or reaction of the
general self, through the State, with personal vengeance. [1] Even in
the vulgar form, when a brutal murder evokes a general desire to have
the offender served out, [2] the general or social indignation is
not the same as the selfish desire for revenge. It is the offspring
of a rough notion of law and humanity, and of the feeling that a
striking aggression upon them demands to be strikingly put down. Such
a sentiment is a part {228} of the consciousness which maintains the
system of rights, and can hardly be absent where that consciousness
is strong.


The second perversion consists in the superstition that punishment
should be ÒequivalentÓ to offence. In a sense, we have seen, it
is _identical_; _i.e._ it is a return of the offenderÕs act upon
himself by a connection inevitable in a moral organism. But as for
_equivalence_ of pain inflicted, either with the pain caused by the
offence or with its guilt, the State knows nothing of it and has no
means of securing it. It cannot estimate either pain or moral guilt.
Punishment cannot be adapted to factors which cannot be known. And
further, the attempt to punish for immorality has evils of its own.
[1] The graduation of punishments must depend on wholly different
principles, which we will consider in speaking of punishment as
preventive or deterrent.


iii. The graduation of punishments must be almost entirely determined
by experience of their operation as deterrents. It is to be borne in
mind, indeed, (i.) that the Òreversionary rightsÓ of humanity in the
offender are not to be needlessly sacrificed, and (ii.) that the true
essence of punishment, as punishment, the negation of the offenderÕs
anti-social will, is in some way to be secured. But these conditions
are included in the preventive or deterrent theory of punishment, if
completely understood; if, that is to say, it is made clear precisely
what it is that is to be prevented.

If we speak of punishment, then, as having for {229} its aim to be
deterrent or preventive, we must not understand this to mean that a
majority, or any persons in power, may rightly prevent, by the threat
of penalties, any acts that seem to them to be inconvenient.

That which is to be prevented by punishment is a violation of the
State-maintained system of rights by a person who is a party to
that system, and therefore the above-mentioned conditions, implied
in a true understanding of the reformatory and retributive aspects
of punishment, are also involved in it as deterrent. But, this
being admitted, we may add to them the distinctive principle on
which a deterrent theory insists. If a lighter punishment deter as
effectively as a heavier, it is wrong to impose the heavier. For the
precise aim of State action is the maintenance of rights; and if
rights are effectively maintained without the heavier punishment,
the aim of the State does not justify its imposition. It is well
known that success in the maintenance of rights depends not only on
the severity of punishments, but also on the true adjustment of the
rights themselves to human ends, and on that certainty of detecting
crime which is a result of efficient government. And it must always
be considered, in dealing with a relative failure of the deterrent
power of punishment in regard to certain offences, whether a better
adjustment of rights or a greater certainty of detection will not
meet the end more effectively than increased seventy of punishment.
We have seen that the equivalence of punishment and offence is really
a meaningless superstition. And there is no principle on which {230}
punishment can be rationally graduated, except its deterrent power as
learned by experience. This view corresponds to the true limits of
State action as determined by the means at its disposal compared with
the end which is its justification, and is therefore, when grasped in
its full meaning as not denying the nature of punishment, the true
theory of it.

We saw, in speaking of punishment as retributive, in what sense it
can and cannot rest upon a judgment imputing moral guilt. Of degrees
of moral guilt as manifested in the particular acts of individuals,
the State, like all of us, is necessarily ignorant. But this is
not to say that punishment is wholly divorced from a just moral
sentiment. Undoubtedly it implies and rests upon a disapproval of
that hostile attitude to the system of rights which is implied in the
realised intention constituting the violation of right. Though in
practice the distinction between civil and criminal law in England
carries out no thoroughly logical demarcation, yet it is true on
the whole to say with Hegel that, in the matter of a civil action,
there is no violation of right as such, but only a question in whom
a certain right resides; while in a matter of criminal law there is
involved an infraction of right as such, which by implication is a
denial of the whole sphere of law and order. This infraction the
general conscience disapproves, and its disapproval is embodied in
a forcible dealing with the offender, however that dealing may be
graduated by other considerations.

I may touch here on an interesting point of detail, following Green.
If punishment is essentially {231} graduated according to its
deterrent power, and not according to moral guilt, how does it come
to pass that Òextenuating circumstancesÓ are allowed to influence
sentences? That they do so really, if not nominally, even in
England, there can be no doubt. Is it not that they indicate a less
degree of wickedness in the offender than the offence in question
would normally presuppose? It would seem that judges themselves
are sometimes under this impression. But it may well be that they
act under a right instinct and assign a wrong reason. For it is
impossible to get over the fact that moral iniquity is something
which cannot be really estimated. The true reason for allowing
circumstances which change the character of the act to influence
the sentence is that, in changing its character, they may take it
out of the class of offences from which men need to be deterred by
a recognised amount of severity. If a man is starving and steals a
turnip, his offence, being so exceptionally conditioned, does not
threaten the general right of property, and does not need to be
associated with any high degree of terror in order to protect that
right. A man who steals under no extraordinary pressure of need does
what might become a common practice if not associated with as much
terror as is found by experience to deter men from theft.

It may be said, in some exceptional emergency, Òbut many men are
now starving; ought not the theft of food, on the principle of
prevention, to be now punished with extreme severity, as other wise
it is likely to become common?Ó Or in general, ought not severity to
increase with {231} temptation or provocation, as a greater deterrent
is needed to counterbalance this? The case in which the temptation or
provocation is exceptional has just been dealt with. But if abnormal
temptation or provocation becomes common, as in a famine, or in some
excited condition of public feeling, then it must be remembered that
not one right only, but the system of rights as such, is what the
State has to maintain. If starvation is common, some readjustment of
rights, or at least some temporary protection of the right to live,
is the remedy indicated, and not, or not solely, increased severity
in dealing with theft. [1] If provocation becomes common, then the
rights of those provoked must be remembered, and the provocation
itself perhaps made punishable, like the singing of faction songs in
Ireland. Punishment is to protect rights, not to encourage wrongs.


Thus, we have seen the true nature and aims of punishment as
following from the aim of the State in maintaining the system of
rights instrumental to the fullest life. The three main aspects of
punishment which we have considered are really inseparable, and each,
if properly explained, expands so as to include the others.

We may, in conclusion, sum up the whole theory of State action in
the formula which we inherit from Rousseau--that Sovereignty is the
exercise of the General Will.

First. All State action is General in its bearing and justification,
even if particular, or rather {232} concrete, in its details. It
is embodied in a _system_ of rights, and there is no element of it
which is not determined by a bearing upon a public interest. The
verification of this truth, throughout, for example, our English
system of public and private Acts of Parliament, would run parallel
to the logical theory of the Universal Judgment as it passes into
Judgments whose subjects are proper names. But the immediate point is
that no rights are absolute, or detached from the whole, but all have
their warrant in the aim of the whole, which at the same time implies
their adjustment and regulation according to general principles. This
generality of law is practically an immense protection to individuals
against arbitrary interference. It makes every regulation strike a
class and not a single person.

And, secondly. All State action is at bottom the exercise of a Will;
the real Will, or the Will as logically implied in intelligences
as such, and more or less recognised as imperative upon them. And,
therefore, though in the form of force it acts through automatism,
that is, not directly as conscious Will, but through a system which
gives rise to acts by influences apparently alien, yet the root
and source of the whole structure is of the nature of Will, and
its end, like that of organic automatism, is to clear the road for
true volition; it is Òforcing men to be free.Ó And in so far as by
misdirection of the automatic [1] process it {234} encroaches on
the region of living Will the region where the good realises itself
directly by its own force as a motive it is Òsawing off the branch on
which it sits,Ó and superseding the aim by the instrument.
