CHAPTER I.

RISE AND CONDITIONS OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL THEORY OF THE STATE

1. First, it will be well to indicate, in a very few words, what is
implied in a Òphilosophical theory,Ó as distinguished from theories
which make no claim to be philosophical. The primary difference
is, that a philosophical treatment is the study of some thing as a
whole and for its own sake. In a certain sense it may be compared
to the gaze of a child or of an artist. It deals, that is, with the
total and unbroken effect of its object. It desires to ascertain
what a thing is, what is its full characteristic and being, its
achievement in the general act of the world. History, explanation,
analysis into cause and conditions, have value for it only in so
far as they contribute to the intelligent estimation of the fullest
nature and capabilities of the real individual whole which is under
investigation. We all know that a flower is one thing for the
geometrician, another for the chemist, another for {2} the botanist,
and another, again, for the artist. Now, philosophy can of course
make no pretension to cope with any one of the specialists on his
own ground. But the general nature of the task imposed upon it is
this: aiding itself, so far as possible, by the trained vision of all
specialists, to make some attempt to see the full significance of
the flower as a word or letter in the great book of the world. And
this we call studying it, as it is, and for its own sake, without
reservation or presupposition. It is assumed, then, for the purpose
of a philosophical treatment, that everything, and more particularly
in this case the political life of man, has a nature of its own,
which is worthy of investigation on its own merits and for its own
sake. How its phases come into being, or what causes or conditions
have played a part in its growth, are other questions well worthy of
investigation. But the philosophical problem is rather to see our
object as it is and to learn what it is, to estimate, so to speak,
its kind and degree of self-maintenance in the world, than to trace
its history or to analyse its causation.

Yet such phrases as Òwhat it isÓ and Òfor its own sakeÓ must not
mislead us. They do not mean that the nature of any reality which we
experience can be appreciated in isolation from the general world of
life and knowledge. On the contrary, they imply that when fully and
fairly considered from the most thoroughly adequate point of view,
our subject matter will reveal its true position and relations with
reference to all else that man can do and can know. This position and
these relations constitute its rank or significance in the totality
{3} of experience, and this value or significance--in the present
case, what the form of life in question enables man to do and to
become--is just what we mean by its nature Òin itself,Ó or its full
and complete nature, or its significance when thoroughly studied Òfor
its own sakeÓ from an adequate point of view. Further illustrations
of the distinction between an adequate point of view and partial or
limited modes of consideration, and of the relations between the
former and the latter, will be found in the following chapter.

2. In a certain sense it would be true to say that wherever men have
lived, there has always been a ÒState.Ó That is to say, there has
been some association or corporation, larger than the family, and
acknowledging no power superior to itself. But it is obvious that
the experience of a State in this general sense of the word is not
co-extensive with true political experience, and that something much
more definite than this is necessary to awaken curiosity as to the
nature and value of the community in which man finds himself to be a
member.

Such curiosity has been awakened and sustained principally if not
exclusively by two kindred types of associated life--the City-state
of ancient Greece, and the Nation-state of the modern world. It will
throw light on the nature of our subject if we glance rapidly at the
characteristics to which it is due that political philosophy began in
connection with the former, and revived in connection with the latter.

In considering the Greek city-states in connection with the birth of
political philosophy, there are three points which press upon our
attention:{4}
    _a_. the type of experience which they presented;
    _b_. the type of mind which that experience implied; and
    _c_. the type of interpretation which such a mind elicited from
    such an experience.

_a_. A Greek city-state presented a marked contrast to the modes
of human association which prevailed in the non-Greek world. It
differed from them above all things by its distinct individuality.
No doubt there was a recognisable character in the life and conduct
of Egypt or of Assyria, of Phoenicia or of Israel. But the community
which has a youth, a maturity, and a decadence, as distinct as those
of a single human being, and very nearly as self-conscious; which
has a tone and spirit as recognisable in the words and bearing of
its members as those of a character in a play; and which expresses
its mind in the various regions of human action and endurance
much as an artist expresses his individuality in the creations of
his genius--such a community had existed, before the beginnings
of the modern world, in the Greek city-state, and in the Greek
city-state alone. A political consciousness in the strict sense
was a necessary factor in the experience of such a commonwealth.
The demand for ÒautonomyÓ--government by oneÕs own law,--and for
ÒisonomyÓ--government according to equal law--though far from
being always satisfied, was inherent in the Greek nature; and its
strenuousness was evinced by the throes of revolution and the labours
of legislation which were shaking the world of Greece at the dawn of
history. The very instrument of all political action was invented,
so far as we can see, by the Greeks. The simple device by which an
orderly vote is {5} taken, and the minority acquiesce in the will
of the majority as if it had been their own--an invention no less
definite than that of the lever or the wheel--is found for the first
time as an everyday method of decision in Greek political life.

_b_. Such a type of experience implies a corresponding type of mind.
It is not surprising that science and philosophy should owe their
birth to the genius from which politics sprang. For politics is
the expression of reason in the relations that bind man to man, as
science and philosophy are the expression of it in the relations
which link together manÕs whole experience. The mind which can
recognise itself practically in the order of the commonwealth,
can recognise itself theoretically in the order of nature. And
ultimately, though not at first (for curiosity is awakened by
objects perceived in space and time, before attention is turned to
the very hinge and centre of manÕs own being), science passes into
philosophy; and mind, and conduct, and the political consciousness,
are themselves made objects of speculation. It has become a
commonplace that this transference of curiosity from the outer to the
inner--really, that is, from the partial to the total world--took
shape in the work of Socrates, who invested with the greatness of
his own intelligence and character a movement which the needs of
the age had rendered inevitable. And thus there arose the ethical
and political philosophy of Plato and Aristotle, the successors of
Socrates, just at the time when the distinctive political life of
Greece was beginning to decay.

_c_. This philosophy, like all genuine philosophy, {6} was an
interpretation of the experience presented to it; and in this case
the interpretation was due to minds which were themselves a part
of the phenomena on which they reflected. Such minds, hostile as
they may feel themselves to the spirit of the age, and however
passionately they may cry out for reform or for revolution, are none
the less its representatives; and their interpretation, though it
may modify and even mutilate the phenomena, will nevertheless be
found to throw the central forces and principles of the time into
the clearest light. So PlatoÕs negative treatment of the family, and
of other elements which seem essential to Greek civilisation, was
no bar to his grasping, and representing with unequalled force, the
central principle of the life around him. The fundamental idea of
Greek political philosophy, as we find it in Plato and Aristotle,
is that the human mind can only attain its full and proper life in
a community of minds, or more strictly in a community pervaded by a
single mind, uttering itself consistently though differently in the
life and action of every member of the community. This conception
is otherwise expressed by such phrases as Òthe State is natural,Ó
_i.e._ is a growth or evolution, apart from which the end implied
in manÕs origin cannot be attained; Òthe State is prior to the
individual,Ó _i.e._ there is a principle or condition underlying
the life of the human individual, which will not admit of that life
becoming what it has in it to be, unless the full sphere or arena
which is constituted by the life of the State is realised in fact.
The whole is summed up in the famous expression of Aristotle, ÒMan is
a creature formed for the life of the City-state.Ó The {7} working
out of this idea, as we find it in PlatoÕs commonwealth, is bizarre
to our minds; but its difficulty really lies in its simplicity and
directness; and there is no sound political philosophy which is not
an embodiment of PlatoÕs conception. The central idea is this: that
every class of persons in the community--the statesman, the soldier,
the workman--has a certain distinctive type of mind which fits its
members for their functions, and that the community essentially
consists in the working of these types of mind in their connection
with one another, which connection constitutes their subordination
to the common good. This working or adjustment obviously depends in
the last resort on the qualities present in the innermost souls of
the members of the community; and thus the outward organisation of
society is really as it were a body which at every point and in every
movement expresses the characteristics of a mind. We must not pause
here to follow up the consequences of such a conception; but it will
be seen at once, by those who reflect upon it, to imply that every
individual mind must have its qualities drawn out in various ways to
answer to--in fact, to constitute--the relations and functions which
make up the community; and that in this sense every mind is a mirror
or impression of the whole community from its own peculiar point of
view. The ethical assumption or principle of PlatoÕs conception is,
that a healthy organisation of the commonwealth will involve, by a
necessary connection, a healthy balance and adjustment of qualities
in the individual soul, and _vice versa_. An attempt will be made
to illustrate this principle further in the latter portion {8} of
the present work. The general nature of PlatoÕs conception--the
characteristic conception of Greek political philosophy--is all that
concerns us here.

It is important to observe that during the very genesis of this
philosophical conception of society, an antagonistic view was
powerfully represented. The individual could not freely find himself
in the community unless he was capable of repudiating it; the
possibility of negation, as a logician might express it, is necessary
to a really significant affirmation. Thus we find in the very age of
Plato and Aristotle the most startling anticipations of those modern
ideas which seem diametrically opposed to theirs. We find the idea
of nature identified not with the mature fulness, but with the empty
starting point of life; we meet with the phenomena of vegetarianism,
water-drinking, the reduction of dress to its minimum, in short, the
familiar symptoms of the longing for the Òreturn to nature,Ó with all
that it implies; we find law and political unity treated as a tissue
of artifice and convention, and the individual disdaining to identify
himself with the citizenship of a single state, but claiming to be a
stranger in the city and a citizen of the world. To prove that these
ideas were not without their justification, it is enough to point out
that in some instances they were accompanied by a polemic against
slavery, which, as a form of solidarity, was upheld in a qualified
sense at least by Aristotle. The existence of this negative criticism
is enough to show how distinctly the Greek intellect set before
itself the fundamental problem of the relation between the individual
and society, and of how high a quality was the bond of union which
{9} maintained this relation in such intimacy among minds of a temper
so analytic.

3. Many writers have told the story of the change which came over the
mind of Greece when the independent sovereignty of its City-states
became a thing of the past. For our purpose it is enough to draw
attention to the fact that with this change the political or social
philosophy of the great Greek time not only lost its supremacy,
but almost ceased to be understood. From this period forward, till
the rise of the modern Nation-states, menÕs thoughts about life
and conduct were cast in the mould of moral theory, of religious
mysticism and theology, or of jurisprudence. The individual demanded
in the sphere of ethics and religion to be shown a life sufficing
to himself apart from any determinate human society--a problem
which Plato and Aristotle had assumed to be insoluble. Stoicism
and Epicureanism, the earliest non-national creeds of the western
world, triumphantly developed the ideas which at first, as we saw,
were little more than a rebellion against the central Socratic
philosophy. Cosmopolitanism, the conception of humanity, the ideal
of a ÒSociety of FriendsÓ--the Epicurean league--from which women
were not excluded, and the precept of Ònot expecting from life more
than it has to give,Ó take the place of the highly individualised
commonwealth, with its strenuous masculine life of war and politics,
and its passionate temper which felt that nothing had been
accomplished so long as anything remained undone.

With this change of temper in the civilised world there is brought
into prominence a great deal of {10} human nature which had not found
expression through the immediate successors of Socrates. In the
period between Aristotle and Cicero there is more than a whisper of
the sound which meets us like a trumpet blast in the New Testament,
Òneither Jew nor Greek, barbarian nor Scythian, bond nor free.Ó But
the unworldliness which took final shape in Christianity was destined
to undergo a long transmigration through shapes of other-worldliness
before it should return in modern thought to the unity from which it
started; and the history of ethics and religion has little bearing
upon true political theory between the death of Aristotle and the
awakening of the modern consciousness in the Reformation.

In so far as the political ideas of antiquity were preserved
to modern times otherwise than in the manuscripts of Plato and
Aristotle, the influence which preserved them was that of Roman
Jurisprudence. The Roman rule, though it stereotyped the state of
things in which genuine political function and the spur of freedom
were unknown, had one peculiar gift by which it handed to posterity
the germs of a great conception of human life. This is not the place
to describe at length the origin of that vast practical induction
from the working of the ÒforeignersÕ courtÓ at Rome which obtained
for itself the name of the Law of Nations, and which, as tinged with
ideal theory, was known as the Law of Nature. Whatever fallacies may
be near at hand when Ònatural rightÓ is named, the conception that
there is in man, as such, something which must be respected, a law
of life which is his Ònature,Ó being indeed another name {11} for
his reason, and in some sense or other a ÒfreedomÓ and an ÒequalityÓ
which are his birthright--this conception was not merely a legacy
from Stoic ideas, which had almost a religious inspiration, but was
solidly founded on the judicial experience of the most practical race
that the world has ever seen.

4. In order that the forces which lay hidden in the conception
of Natural Right and Freedom, like the powers of vegetation in a
seed, might unfold themselves in the modern world, it was necessary
that conditions should recur analogous to those which had first
elicited them. And these earlier conditions were those of the Greek
City-state; for it was here, as we have seen, that the conception of
manÕs nature had flourished, as the idea of a purposive evolution
into a full and many-sided social life, while in Stoic philosophy and
Roman juristic theory it had become more and more a shibboleth and
a formula which lost in depth of meaning what it gained in range of
application.

To restore their ancient significance, expanded in conformity with
a larger order of things, to the traditional formulae, demanded
just the type of experience which was furnished by the modern
Nation-state. The growth of Nation-states in modern Europe was in
progress, we are told, from the ninth to the fifteenth century. And
it is towards and after the close of this period, and especially
in the seventeenth century when the national consciousness of the
English people, as of others, had become thoroughly awakened, that
political speculation in the strict sense begins again, {12} after
an interval extending back to the Politics of Aristotle. To let one
example serve for many; when we read John of GauntÕs praises of
England in ShakespeareÕs Richard II., we feel ourselves at once in
contact with the mind of a social unity, such as necessarily to raise
in any inquiring intelligence all those problems which were raised
for Plato and Aristotle by the individuality of Athens and Sparta.
And so we see the earliest political speculation of the modern world
groping, as it were, for ideas by help of which to explain the
experience of an individual self-governing sovereign society. And
for the most part the ideas that offer themselves are those of Roman
Jurisprudence, but distorted by political applications and by the
rhetoric of Protestant fanaticism. As Mr. Ritchie [1] points out, the
conception of natural right and a law of nature makes a strange but
effective coalition with the temper of the Wycliffite cry

  ÒWhen Adam dalf, and Eve span,
   Who was then the gentleman?Ó

The notions of contract, of force, of representation in a
single legal Òperson,Ó are now applied separately or together
to the phenomenon of the self-governing individual community.
But the solution remains imperfect, and the fundamental fact of
self-government refuses to be construed either as the association of
individuals, originally free and equal, for certain limited purposes,
or as the absolute absorption of their wills in the ÒpersonÓ of a
despotic sovereign.


The revival of a true philosophical meaning {13} within the abstract
terms of juristic tradition was the work of the eighteenth century
as a whole. For the sake of clearness, and with as much historical
justice as ever attaches to an attribution of the kind, we may
connect it with the name of a single man--Jean Jacques Rousseau. For
it is Rousseau who stands midway between Hobbes and Locke on the
one hand, and Kant and Hegel on the other, and in whose writings
the actual revival of the full idea of human nature may be watched
from paragraph to paragraph as it struggles to throw off the husk of
an effete tradition. Between Locke and Rousseau the genius of Vico
and of Montesquieu had given a new meaning to the dry formulae of
law by showing the sap of society circulating within them. Moreover
the revived experience of the Greeks came in the nick of time. It
was influential with Rousseau himself, and little as he grasped the
political possibilities of a modern society, in matters of sheer
principle this influence led him on the whole in the right direction.
His insight was just, when it showed him that every political whole
presented the same problem which had been presented by the Greek
City-state, and involved the same principles. And he bequeathed
to his successors the task of substituting for the mere words and
fictions of contract, nature, and original freedom, the idea of the
common life of an essentially social being, expressing and sustaining
the human will at its best.

According to the view here indicated, the resurrection of true
political philosophy out of the dead body of juristic abstractions
was inaugurated by {14} Vico and Montesquieu, and decisively declared
itself in Jean Jacques Rousseau. The idea which most of us have
formed of Òthe new Evangel of a _Contrat Social_Ó is not in harmony
with this representation of the matter. Was it, we may be asked,
a genuine political philosophy which inspired the leaders of the
French Revolution? And the question cannot be evaded by denying all
connection between the theory and the practice of that age. The
phraseology of the revolutionary declarations [1]--which will strike
the reader accustomed to nineteenth century socialism as exceedingly
moderate and even conservative in tone--is undoubtedly to a great
extent borrowed from RousseauÕs writings.


Perhaps the truth of the matter may be approached as follows. The
popular rendering of a great manÕs views is singularly liable to run
straight into the pit-falls against which he more particularly warned
the world. This could be proved true in an extraordinary degree of
such men as Plato and Spinoza, and still more astonishingly, perhaps,
of the founder of the Christian religion. The reason is obvious. A
great man works with the ideas of his age, and regenerates them. But
in as far as he regenerates them, he gets beyond the ordinary mind;
while in as far as he operates with them, he remains accessible to
it. And his own mind has its ordinary side; the regeneration of
ideas which he is able to effect is not complete, and the notions of
the day not only limit his entire range of achievement--where the
strongest runner will get to must depend on where he starts--but
float about unassimilated {15} within his living stream of thought.
Now all this ordinary side of his mind will partake of the strength
and splendour of his whole nature. And thus he will seem to have
preached the very superstitions which he combated. For in part he
has done so, being himself infected; in part the overwhelming bias
of his interpreters has reversed the meaning of his very warnings,
by transferring the importance, due to his central thought, to some
detail or metaphor which belongs to the lower level of his mind. It
is an old story how Spinoza, Òthe God-intoxicated man,Ó was held to
be an Òatheist,Ó when in truth he was rather an ÒacosmistÓ; and in
the same way, on a lower plane, the writer who struggled through to
the idea that true sovereignty lay in the dominion of a common social
good as expressed through law and institutions, is held to have
ascribed absolute supremacy to that chance combination of individual
voices in a majority, which he expressly pointed out to have, in
itself, no authority at all.

But there is something more to be said of cases, like that under
discussion, where a great manÕs ideas touch the practical world. If
the complete and positive idea becomes narrow and negative as it
impinges upon every-day life, this may be not only a consequence
of its transmission through every-day minds, but a qualification
for the work it has to do. The narrower truth may be, so to speak,
the cutting edge of the more complete, as the negation is of the
affirmation. And the vulgar notion of popular sovereignty and of
natural right may have been necessary to do a work which a more
organic social theory would have been too delicate to achieve. {16}
Like the faith in a speedy second coming of Christ among the early
Christians, the gospel according to Jean Jacques may have taken for
the minds of Revolutionary France a form which was serviceable as
well as inevitable at the moment. If, as we said above, the great man
is always misunderstood, it seems to follow that when his germinal
ideas have been sown they must assert themselves first in lower
phases if they are ever to bear fruit at all. And therefore, while
not denying the influence of Rousseau on the Revolution, we shall
attempt to show that he had another and a later influence, more
adequate to the true reach of his genius.

