CHAPTER IX.

ROUSSEAUÕS THEORY AS APPLIED TO THE MODERN STATE: KANT, FICHTE, HEGEL.

1. Probably no other philosophical movement has ever focussed in
itself so much human nature as the post-Kantian Idealism. It has
fallen to the present writer to show elsewhere [1] how the Òfinding
of Greek art,Ó which it owed to Winckelmann, gave it unrivalled
insight into mind as embodied in objects of sense. Here we have to
deal with another source of its ideas. As we pointed out in the
first chapter, the ethical and political theory of Kant, Fichte, and
Hegel springs from the same _Evangel of Jean Jacques_ from which
the French Revolution drew its formulae. It would not be true to
say that it springs from this alone. Great philosophers know how
to fuse the materials they work in; and particularly the modern
abstraction of ÒfreedomÓ was blended, for Hegel, with the idea of
concrete life through the tradition of the Greek city, with its
affinity for autonomy on the one hand and for beauty on the other.
Nevertheless, few lines of affiliation are better established in the
history of philosophy than that between RousseauÕs {236} declaration
that liberty is the quality of man and the philosophy of Right as it
developed from Kant to Hegel.


It has been suggested that the literary intercourse of France,
England, and Germany was far closer in the eighteenth century than
it is to-day, in spite of the immense mechanical development of
communication in the interval. National self-consciousness and the
divergent growth of national minds have, it is urged, raised a
barrier between peoples, which existed in the last century to a far
smaller degree. [1] This question of literary history lies beyond my
subject; but at least it seems probable that Rousseau had a power
in Germany which no French writer of to-day could possibly exercise
outside his own country. His educational influence [2] alone forms
a considerable chapter in the history of _PŠdagogik_, and touches
closely on philosophy. Our psychologists of childhood are his
spiritual descendants, and indeed the question of the development of
the human being is closely akin to the question of liberty.



His literary influence, as the prophet of nature and feeling, and the
champion of sentimental {237} religion against the _Philosophes_,
carried everything before it. He struck into the path which had
been opened in Germany by the translation of ThomsonÕs _Seasons_
before 1750, and followed by the Swiss critics and the idyllic
poets, who were opponents of the dominant pseudo-classicism. [1]
Jacobi, who passed some years of his youth at Geneva, owed his
doctrine of feeling as the faculty of religious truth in part at
least to Rousseau. Klinger, whose drama, _Sturm und Drang_, gave its
name to the romantic and naturalist revolution, marked by GoetheÕs
_Gštz von Berlichingen_ (1773) and SchillerÕs _RŠuber_ (1781),
was responsible, we are told, in later years, for the surprising
judgment that Rousseau (in _Emile_) is the young manÕs best guide
through life. [2] Even Schiller and Herder passed through a period of
enthusiastic admiration for Rousseau. It is exceedingly significant
that SchillerÕs _Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Humanity_
are addressed expressly to the problem of reconciling the claims of
Nature [3] and of the State upon individual man. For, when Schiller
suggests that the clue to the required reconciliation between Nature
and the State lies in the union of feeling and intelligence which is
found in Beauty, we have before us in a single focus three main types
of experience, from the fusion of which a new idealism was to emerge.


{238} 2. Returning to our immediate subject, the Philosophy of
Right, we will consider for a moment the specific relation of
RousseauÕs idea of Freedom to Kantian or post-Kantian thought. It is
permissible, perhaps, to embody the chief part of what has to be said
in extracts from works of great original value and not very generally
accessible. Not only the poets and sentimentalists of Germany, but
also the great philosophers, distinctly recognised the debt of the
German genius to the ideas of Rousseau. The conception of the ÒSocial
ContractÓ has an importance which surprises the modern reader in the
political philosophy of Kant and more especially of Fichte, and it
is not till we come to Hegel that the literal interpretation of the
ÒSocial ContractÓ is completely discriminated from the truth conveyed
by the doctrine of the General Will. Apart from all questions about
the literal meaning of the ÒSocial Contract,Ó it is simple fact that
the whole political philosophy of Kant, Hegel, and Fichte is founded
on the idea of freedom as the essence of man, first announced--such
was HegelÕs distinct judgment--by Rousseau. I begin by citing the
crucial passage from HegelÕs _History of Philosophy_, which gives in
a few lines the basis of his own theory of Right, as well as his view
of RousseauÕs position. [1]


After explaining that Rousseau treated the right of Government as
on one side, in its historical aspect, resting [1] on force and
compulsion, Hegel {239} continues,

  ÒBut the principle of this justification (the absolute
  justification of the State) Rousseau makes the free
  will, and, disregarding the positive right (or law)
  of States, he answers to the above question [2] (as
  to the justification or basis of the State) that man
  has free will, seeing that ÔFreedom is the distinctive
  quality of man. [3] To renounce oneÕs freedom, means to
  renounce oneÕs humanity. Not to be free is therefore a
  renunciation of oneÕs human rights, and even of oneÕs
  duties.Õ The slave has neither rights nor duties.
  Rousseau says, therefore, [4] The _fundamental problem_
  [5] is to find a form of association which shall protect
  and defend at once the person and the property of every
  member with the whole common force, and in which each
  individual, inasmuch as he attaches himself to this
  association, _obeys only himself, and remains as free
  as before_ [5] The solution is given by the _Social
  Contract_; [5] it (Rousseau says) is this combination, to
  which each belongs through his will."

  These principles, thus set up in the abstract, we cannot
  but take as correct; yet ambiguity begins at once. Man is
  free; this is no doubt the substantive nature of man; and
  in the State it is not only not abandoned, but in fact
  it is therein first established. The freedom of nature,
  the capacity of freedom, is not the actual freedom; {240}
  for nothing short of the State is the actualisation of
  freedom.

  But the misunderstanding about the Ò_General Will_Ó
  begins at the following point. The notion of Freedom must
  not be taken in the sense of the casual free-will of each
  individual, but in the sense of the reasonable will, the
  will in and for itself. [6] The general will is not to be
  regarded as compounded of the expressed individual wills,
  [7] so that these remain absolute; else the proposition
  would be true, Òwhere the minority has to obey the
  majority, there is no freedom.Ó Rather the general will
  must be the rational will, even though people are not
  aware of it; the State, therefore, is no such association
  as is determined upon by individuals.

  The false apprehension of these principles does not
  matter to us. What matters to us is that by their means
  it comes as a content into consciousness, that man has
  in his mind Freedom as the downright absolute, that the
  free will is the notion of man. It is just freedom that
  is the self of thought; one who repudiates thought and
  talks of freedom knows not what he is saying. The oneness
  of thought with itself [8] is freedom, the free will.
  Thought, only taken in the form of will, is the impulse
  to break through [9] oneÕs mere subjectivity, is relation
  to definite being, realisation of oneÕs {241} self,
  inasmuch as I will to make myself as an existent adequate
  to myself as thinking. The will is free only as that
  which thinks.

  The principle of freedom dawned on the world in Rousseau,
  and gave infinite strength to man, who thus apprehended
  himself as infinite. This furnishes the transition to
  the Kantian philosophy, which, from a theoretical point
  of view, took this principle as its basis. Knowledge
  [10] was thus directed upon its own freedom, and upon
  a concrete content, [10] which it possesses in its
  consciousness.Ó


Everyone is familiar, in general terms, with the part played by the
idea of freedom in KantÕs philosophy. It may, however, be of interest
to point out how definitely it comes to him in the form given it by
Rousseau. Omitting the whole subject of KantÕs educational interest,
[1] I will refer to two passages from KantÕs early notes [2] in
connection with the tract on the _Feelings of the Sublime and the
Beautiful_, and two from the _Philosophy of Right_, which first
appeared in the autumn of 1796.

First, then, to establish the definite impulse communicated to Kant
in his earlier years by Rousseau in particular.

  ÒI am myself,Ó he writes, [1] Òa student by inclination.
  I feel the whole thirst for knowledge, and the covetous
  restlessness that demands to advance in it, and again the
  satisfaction of every {242} step of progress. There was a
  time when I believed that all this might constitute the
  honour of humanity, and I despised the crowd that knows
  nothing. It was Rousseau who set me right. That dazzling
  privilege disappeared; and I should think myself far less
  useful than common artisans if I did not believe that my
  line of study might impart value to all others in the way
  of establishing the rights of humanity.Ó


Kant seems, from the context, to be foreshadowing the idea of his
critical philosophy, as putting man in his place in the order of
creation.

  ÒIf there is any science,Ó he says just below, Òwhich man
  really needs, it is that which I teach, to fill properly
  _that_ place which is assigned to man in creation; a
  science from which he can learn what one must be in order
  to be human.Ó

This throws light on the curious passage in the same set of notes,
[1] where, in a discussion of the idea of Providence, Kant first
refers to NewtonÕs discovery of order in the multiplicity of the
planetary motions, and then proceeds,

  ÒRousseau first discovered, beneath the multiplicity
  of the forms assumed by man, the deeply latent nature
  of humanity, and the hidden law, according to which
  Providence is justified by his observations. Before that
  the objection of Alphonsus and of Manes [2] held the
  field. After Newton and Rousseau, God is justified, and
  henceforwards PopeÕs doctrine is true.Ó

ÒPopeÕs doctrineÓ is no doubt his Leibnitzian optimism, founded on a
supposed insight into manÕs true place in creation. [1] RousseauÕs
{243} Òdiscovery,Ó which Kant here connects with this doctrine, must
be his assertion of manÕs natural goodness and freedom, which he
tends to forfeit by departing in civilisation from the place assigned
him by nature. It is clear that RousseauÕs impeachment of literature
and civilisation had at this time made a considerable impression upon
Kant. It is all the more interesting to see Kant retracing, on a very
different scale, the development which Rousseau had initiated, from
natural to social and ethical freedom.


I subjoin two passages from the _Philosophy of Right_ (1796),
which exhibit this later development, still in its connection with
RousseauÕs phraseology.

  Ò_The innate Right is one only_.--Freedom (independence
  of the constraining will of another), in as far as it can
  co-exist with the freedom of every other according to a
  universal law, is this unique original right, belonging
  to every human being by reason of his humanity.Ó [1]


An indication of the embodiment of this freedom in the State may be
given as follows:

  ÒAll those three powers in the State (Sovereignty or
  the Legislative, the Executive, and the Judicial), are
  offices; and, as essential, and necessarily proceeding
  from the idea of a State in general with reference to
  the establishment (Constitution) of one, are offices
  _of State_. They contain the relation of a universal
  supreme Power (which, considered according to laws of
  freedom, can be no other than the united people), to
  the crowd of individuals which compose it _qua_ the
  governed; that is, of the ruler (_imperans_) to the
  {244} subject (_subditus_). The act whereby the people
  constitutes itself into a State, _or strictly speaking
  only the idea of that Act, according to which idea alone
  the justice of the Act can be conceived_, [1] is _the
  original contract_, [2] according to which all (_omnes et
  singuli_) of the people surrender their external freedom,
  in order at once to receive it back again as members of a
  commonwealth, that is, of the people regarded as a State
  (_universi_). And one cannot say, The State, or man in
  the State, has sacrificed a part of its innate outward
  freedom for a certain end; but rather, he has totally
  abandoned his wild lawless freedom in order to find his
  entire freedom again undiminished in a lawful dependence,
  that is, in a condition of right or law; (undiminished),
  because this dependence springs from his own legislative
  will.Ó [3]


It is remarkable, in face of these general views, that both Kant
and Fichte follow Rousseau, for reasons which Kant explains from
the political conditions of the time, in distrusting representative
government. [1]


The passage just cited is of course a reproduction of RousseauÕs
view modified by interpretation very much in the sense in which we
interpreted it above.

3. When we pass to Fichte (whose earlier work upon _Natural Right_
was published actually before that of Kant), we observe the idea
of contract in the act of transmuting itself, though {245} by an
imperfect transition, into the idea of an organic whole. For Fichte,
the State is a necessary implication of the human self; for a self
involves a society of selves, and law or right is the relation
between selves in a bodily world. And the ÒcontractÓ on which
citizenship rests, by the fact that it is general, [1] forges an
indiscernible unity of the social whole. In this connection, Fichte
makes the remarkable claim to be first to apply the simile of an
organism to the whole civic relation. I cite an important passage:

  ÒAs far as I know, the idea of the whole of the State
  has so far only been established through the ideal
  combination of individuals, and thereby the true insight
  into the nature of this relation has been cut off.Ó [2]



You must, he urges, not merely have an idea of combination; you must
show a bond of union beyond the idea, or making the idea necessary.

  ÒIn our account this has been achieved. In the notion
  of that which is to be protected, in accordance with
  the necessary uncertainty _which_ individual will need
  the visible protection, and still further, _which_ it
  will have advantaged invisibly in the case of a wrongful
  will suppressed by the law before its outbreak, all
  individuals are forced into unity.

  {246} ÒThe most fitting simile to elucidate this notion
  is that of an organised natural product, which has
  often been employed in modern times to describe the
  different branches of the public power as a unity, but
  not, so far as I know, to throw light on the whole civic
  relation. Just as, in the natural product, every part
  can be what it is only in _this_ combination, and out
  of this combination simply would not be this (indeed
  outside all organic combination there would simply be
  nothing ...): just so it is only in the combination of
  the State that man attains a definite position in the
  series of things, a point of rest in nature; and each
  attains _this determinate_ position towards others, and
  towards Nature, only through the fact that he is in
  _this determinate_ combination. ... In the organic body
  every part continually maintains the whole, and while it
  maintains it, is itself maintained thereby; just such is
  the citizenÕs relation to the State.Ó

Here we seem to be back with Plato and Aristotle. We are in fact
too near to Plato; for the distinction between maintenance of the
citizenÕs determinate activity, and maintenance of the general
conditions of such activity, being destroyed by Fichte in his desire
to make State action positive and not negative, the conclusion
necessarily arises that the citizen must be secured and maintained in
his definite activity or occupation, and from this springs the notion
of the closed commercial State; ÒclosedÓ against foreign trade in
order that the government may be able to determine prices and assign
occupations. In other words, the basis of the State is still the Ego
conceived as the individual self; it is not the social good operating
by its own {247} power on intelligent will. And, arising from this
individualism, the precautions which seem necessary to protect and
sustain the individual in his fixed relation to the whole, make
FichteÕs ÒClosed Commercial StateÓ perhaps the earliest document of
a rigorous State Socialism. Freedom, as he himself recognises to be
_prima facie_ the case, is annihilated by the provisions for its
protection. [1] It is curious to see RousseauÕs phrase Òforced to be
free,Ó [2] which refers in him to the supremacy of law, reappearing
as a defence of the enforcement of leisure time, [3] as though
freedom were not realised in labour and in loyalty. Here is HegelÕs
judgment of the transition we have just been considering.

  ÒKant began to found right on freedom, and Fichte too
  in his _Natural Right_ made freedom his principle; but
  it is, as in Rousseau, the freedom of the particular
  individual. This is a great beginning; but in order to
  get to particular results they were obliged to accept
  presuppositions. The universal (for them) is not the
  spirit, the substance of the whole, but the external
  mechanical negative power against individuals. ... The
  individuals remain always hard and negative against one
  another; the prison-house, the bonds, become ever more
  oppressive, instead of the State being apprehended as the
  realisation of freedom.Ó [4]


4. To apprehend the State as the realisation of freedom was the aim
of HegelÕs _Philosophy of Right_, which has perhaps been more grossly
misrepresented {247} than any work of a great political philosopher,
excepting PlatoÕs _Republic_.

Popular criticism will tell us that Hegel found his ideal in the
Prussian bureaucracy, and will further hint that his doing so was
to his advantage. Such suggestions imply two misapprehensions,
for one of which HegelÕs tactlessness was responsible, while the
other depends on a genuine difficulty attending any philosophical
analysis of society. I will try to throw light on each of these
misapprehensions.

_(a)_ If Hegel had wished to have a partisan tendency attributed to
his book, he could not have timed it better nor written a preface
more certain to mislead. In 1820, when the book was published, the
minds both of governments and of peoples were full of irritation.
The anti-constitutional reaction had recently declared itself. [1]
The demonstration at the Wartburg, celebrating the anniversary
of the Reformation, and of the Battle of Leipzig, took place in
October, 1817. The unaccountable change in the ideas of the Czar from
Liberalism to reaction took place, we are assured, [2] in June, 1818.
The murder of Kotzebue, a Russian agent, reactionary journalist, and
decayed dramatist, took place in March, 1819. Kotzebue seems to have
been popularly credited with perverting the views of the Czar. His
assassination had an effect in no way related to his real importance.
Hardenberg, the Prussian minister, exclaimed on hearing of it that
a Prussian constitution had now become impossible. Innocent persons
{249} were arrested in Prussia at MetternichÕs instigation, and
private papers were seized and published in a garbled form. The
publication of HegelÕs book with a preface attacking Fries for some
expressions used by him at the Wartburg festival, took place, as we
said, in 1820, and Hegel had moved from Heidelberg to Berlin, having
obtained the honour of a Berlin professorship, in 1818. Small wonder
that Òit was pointed out that the new professor was a favourite of
the leading minister, that his influence was dominant in scholastic
appointments, and that occasional gratuities from the Crown proved
his acceptability,Ó or that Fries remarked that HegelÕs theory of the
State had grown, Ònot in the garden of science, but on the dunghill
of servility.Ó [3] Hegel himself Òwas aware that he had planted a
blow in the face of a shallow and pretentious sect, and that his book
had given great offence to the demagogic folk.Ó [4]


And yet, so far as the essence of HegelÕs political philosophy is
concerned, there is nothing in all this. The first sketch of the
_Philosophy of Right_ was published in the _Encyclopaedia of the
Philosophical Sciences_ in 1817, before Hegel left Heidelberg. His
political interest, in its gradual development, can be traced back
in unpublished writings to 1802. [1] He started from the conception
of the Greek State, on which his early sketch of the ethical system
(1802, unpublished in his lifetime) was founded. And his subsequent
development consisted in enlarging this conception by drawing out
its framework to include the more {250} accented freedom of modern
life, as he divined it from the attentive study both of English and
of German politics. His substantive political theory never changed,
except by development, in accordance with his general attitude
towards the differences between Greek and modern life.


_(b)_ ÒBut,Ó popular criticism will rejoin, Òhere we have HegelÕs
ideal State, depicted by his own hand, and it is pretty much the
Prussian State of his time, tempered by a few references to English
politics. Is not this a narrow horizon and a low ideal?Ó This
criticism is of value, because it leads up to an important feature of
true political theory.

To depict what most people call Òan ideal StateÓ is no more the
object of political philosophy than it is the object, say, of
CarpenterÕs _Human Physiology_ to depict an ÒidealÓ man or an angel.
The object of political philosophy is to understand what a State is,
and it is not necessary for this purpose that the State which is
analysed should be Òideal,Ó but only that it should be a State; just
as the nature of life is represented pretty nearly as well by one
living man as by another.

  ÒEvery State,Ó [1] Hegel says, Òeven if your principles
  lead you to pronounce it bad, even if you detect this
  or that deficiency in it, always has (especially if
  it belongs to the more developed States of our time)
  the essential moments of its existence in it. But
  because it is easier to discover defects than to grasp
  the affirmative, people easily fall into the error of
  allowing particular aspects to lead them to forget the
  inner organism {251} of the State. The State is no work
  of art, it stands in the world, that is, in the sphere
  of caprice, accident, and error; evil behaviour is able
  to mar it in many respects. But the ugliest human being,
  a criminal, a sick man, or a cripple, is all the same a
  living human being; the affirmative, his life, persists
  in spite of the defect, and this affirmative is what we
  are concerned with here.Ó


Of course, no comparison is quite precise, and it may be urged that
the State is more artificial than a human body. However this may
be, [1] we shall at least understand HegelÕs attitude better, and,
as I venture to think, adopt by far the most fruitful standpoint
for ourselves, if we look at political philosophy like one who is
trying to ascertain what is the nature of human life as he observes
it in any or every human body. If the life is there, its essentials
are there, and his aim is to understand them. No doubt a door is
here opened to argument with regard to what logicians call a Òpure
case.Ó In understanding life Òas such,Ó you must, it would seem,
purge out its mere defects, in regard to which it is not Òlife,Ó and
the remainder, what you pledge yourself to as essential, must be _ex
hypothesi_ your ÒidealÓ of life. And perhaps there is no reason to
reject this responsibility if confined to the emphasis of elements
and interconnection of facts. It cannot apply to more.


We cannot construct an ideal body by reducing life, nor an ideal
polity by reducing mind, to its pure case or essentials, since we
cannot construct {252} organisms [1] or history at all. And it is
because this is always being forgotten that the duty of understanding
rather than constructing has to be insisted upon. It is true that in
understanding, as in constructing, we imply essential relations, and
so incur responsibility, and are liable to betray a bias; but still,
life can be understood by help of any creature that is alive, and
therefore it is not the example with which the student works, but the
insight which he shows, that is the decisive point.


4. We have to begin by realising what is involved in the fact that
we are about to treat the analysis of a Modern State as a chapter
in the _Philosophy of Mind_. For HegelÕs _Philosophy of Right_
(or of _Law_), though published by him as an independent work, is
essentially an expansion of paragraphs which form one sub-division of
his _Philosophy of Mind_, itself the third and concluding portion of
the _Encyclopaedia of Philosophy_, of which the two earlier portions
are the _Logic_ and the _Philosophy of Nature_.

We saw in the second chapter of the present work that the mere
force of facts has driven modern sociologists to handle their
science in a more or less intimate connection with Psychology. The
differentia of society, we saw, has been stated in various formulae
of a psychological character. But it seemed to us that, owing to a
neglect of the logic of identity, the nature of mind was broken up
by such unreal distinctions as that between invention and imitation,
varied by the unreal {253} reduction of the one to the other, [1]
and also that an unexplained separation and parallelism survived as
between the individual and the social mind, bearing witness to the
vitality of the superstition which RousseauÕs insight picked out for
condemnation. [2] We do not deny that mind may be more than social;
but in as far as it is social it is still real mind, and that means
that it is not something other than what we know as individual lives,
[3] a pale and unreal reflection of them, but it is a characteristic
which belongs to their most intimate constitution. This was PlatoÕs
analysis of moral autonomy, and his work remains classically valid,
needing only expansion and interpretation in applying it to modern
free intelligence and social self-government.


The position of the analysis of a State in the _Philosophy of Mind_
may be briefly indicated as follows. When we embark on the study of
ordinary Psychology, we take the individual human being as we find
him to-day. We accept him as a formed individual, distinguishing
himself from external things, and possessing what we call a will--a
capacity of seeking his own satisfaction, which he represents to
himself in general ideas by the help of language. We analyse the
self and will with their aspects of memory, attention, association,
impulse, and emotion. But all modern psychologists are aware that
this formed self and will has much history behind it, and presupposes
a long genesis connecting it with simpler forms of {254} soul-life.
Hegel, indeed, was among the first in modern times to see how far
back the story of mind must be taken. The human intelligence, as the
psychologist assumes it, is for him a middle phase in the romance of
which mind is the hero. Before it come the chapters of Anthropology,
which treat of the fixation of a soul in the disciplined powers and
habits of a human body, and then the account [1] of a consciousness
which gradually rises from a struggling perception of objects around
it to a moral and scientific certainty of being at home in the world.


The story of mind, then, begins long before the free mind, the object
of Psychology to-day, has appeared on the scene. And as to this there
would be no great difference of opinion. The peculiarity of HegelÕs
treatment is that his romance of the intelligence not only begins
long before the phase of free mind is reached, but continues long
after. Investigation can no more stop at the individual of to-day
than it can begin with him. His ÒmindÓ is not a separable entity,
and throughout the story no such entity has appeared. It has been
convenient for Hegel to treat the earlier division of the _Philosophy
of Mind_, comprising the Anthropology, Phenomenology, [1] and
Psychology, as dealing _par excellence_ with Mind Subjective. This is
because its main purpose was to trace the growth of Òsubjectivity,Ó
the emergence of the man of full mental {255} stature, aware
of himself, of his ideas and purposes, and confident in his
ÒsubjectivityÓ his self-hood against all comers.


But the following division of the work, under the title of Mind
Objective, deals with a necessary implication which might have been
noted at any point of the entire history of consciousness, though at
any earlier point it could have been treated as referring to mind
only by anticipation.

Here, however, the problem can no longer be deferred. The Òfree
mindÓ does not explain itself and cannot stand alone. Its impulses
cannot be ordered, or, in other words, its purposes cannot be
made determinate, except in an actual system of selves. Except by
expressing itself in relation to an ordered life, which implies
others, it cannot exist. And, therefore, not something additional and
parallel to it, which might or might not exist, but a necessary form
of its own action as real and determinate, is the actual fabric in
which it utters itself as Society and the State. This is what Hegel
treats in the second division of the _Philosophy of Mind_ under the
name of Mind Objective. It is not for him ultimate. A particular
society stands in time, and is open to criticism and to destruction.
Beyond it lies the reality, continuous with mind as known in the
State, but eternal as the former is perishable, which as Absolute
Mind is open to human experience in Art, Religion, and Philosophy.

We will pursue in the following chapter HegelÕs analysis of the
modern State as Mind Objective, a magnified edition, so to speak,
of PlatoÕs _Republic_, bringing before the eye in full detail
distinctions and articulations which were there invisible.
