CHAPTER I
X

CONCLUSION

Now that I have laid down the true principles of political right, and
tried to give the State a basis of its own to rest on, I ought next
to strengthen it by its external relations, which would include the
law of nations, commerce, the right of war and conquest, public right,
leagues, negotiations, treaties, etc. But all this forms a new subject
that is far too vast for my narrow scope. I ought throughout to have
kept to a more limited sphere.




A DISCOURSE

WHICH WON THE PRIZE AT THE ACADEMY OF DIJON IN 1750, ON THIS QUESTION
PROPOSED BY THE ACADEMY:

HAS THE RESTORATION OF THE ARTS AND SCIENCES HAD A PURIFYING EFFECT
UPON MORALS?

Barbaras his ego sum, qui non intelligor illis.--OVID.[1]

[1] Here I am, a barbarian, because men understand me not.




PREFACE


The following pages contain a discussion of one of the most sublime
and interesting of all moral questions. It is not concerned, however,
with those metaphysical subtleties, which of late have found their way
into every department of literature, and from which even our academic
curricula are not always free. We have now to do with one of those
truths on which the happiness of mankind depends.

I foresee that I shall not readily be forgiven for having taken up the
position I have adopted. Setting myself up against all that is nowadays
most admired, I can expect no less than a universal outcry against me:
nor is the approbation of a few sensible men enough to make me count
on that of the public. But I have taken my stand, and I shall be at no
pains to please either intellectuals or men of the world. There are in
all ages men born to be in bondage to the opinions of the society in
which they live. There are not a few, who to-day play the free-thinker
and the philosopher, who would, if they had lived in the time of the
League, have been no more than fanatics. No author, who has a mind to
outlive his own age, should write for such readers.

A word more and I have done. As I did not expect the honour conferred
on me, I had, since sending in my Discourse, so altered and enlarged
it as almost to make it a new work; but in the circumstances I have
felt bound to publish it just as it was when it received the prize. I
have only added a few notes, and left two alterations which are easily
recognisable, of which the Academy possibly might not have approved.
The respect, gratitude and even justice I owe to that body seemed to me
to demand this acknowledgment.




MORAL EFFECTS

OF THE ARTS AND SCIENCES

_Decipimur specie recti_.--HORACE.


The question before me is, "Whether the Restoration of the arts and
sciences has had the effect of purifying or corrupting morals." Which
side am I to take? That, gentlemen, which becomes an honest man, who is
sensible of his own ignorance, and thinks himself none the worse for it.

I feel the difficulty of treating this subject fittingly, before the
tribunal which is to judge of what I advance. How can I presume to
belittle the sciences before one of the most learned assemblies in
Europe, to commend ignorance in a famous Academy, and reconcile my
contempt for study with the respect due to the truly learned?

I was aware of these inconsistencies, but not discouraged by them. It
is not science, I said to myself, that I am attacking; it is virtue
that I am defending, and that before virtuous men--and goodness is even
dearer to the good than learning to the learned.

What then have I to fear? The sagacity of the assembly before which
I am pleading? That, I acknowledge, is to be feared; but rather on
account of faults of construction than of the views I hold. Just
sovereigns have never hesitated to decide against themselves in
doubtful cases; and indeed the most advantageous situation in which a
just claim can be, is that of being laid before a just and enlightened
arbitrator, who is judge in his own case.

To this motive, which encouraged me, I may add another which finally
decided me. And this is, that as I have upheld the cause of truth to
the best of my natural abilities, whatever my apparent success, there
is one reward which cannot fail me. That reward I shall find in the
bottom of my heart.




THE FIRST PART


It is a noble and beautiful spectacle to see man raising himself, so
to speak, from nothing by his own exertions; dissipating, by the light
of reason, all the thick clouds in which he was by nature enveloped;
mounting above himself; soaring in thought even to the celestial
regions; like the sun, encompassing with giant strides the vast extent
of the universe; and, what is still grander and more wonderful, going
back into himself, there to study man and get to know his own nature,
his duties and his end. All these miracles we have seen renewed within
the last few generations.

Europe had relapsed into the barbarism of the earliest ages; the
inhabitants of this part of the world, which is at present so highly
enlightened, were plunged, some centuries ago, in a state still-worse
than ignorance. A scientific jargon, more despicable than mere
ignorance, had usurped the name of knowledge, and opposed an almost
invincible obstacle to its restoration.

Things had come to such a pass, that it required a complete revolution
to bring men back to common sense. This came at last from the quarter
from which it was least to be expected. It was the stupid Mussulman,
the eternal scourge of letters, who was the immediate cause of their
revival among us. The fall of the throne of Constantine brought to
Italy the relics of ancient Greece; and with these precious spoils
France in turn was enriched. The sciences soon followed literature,
and the art of thinking joined that of writing: an order which may
seem strange, but is perhaps only too natural. The world now began to
perceive the principal advantage of an intercourse with the Muses, that
of rendering mankind more sociable by inspiring them with the desire to
please one another with performances worthy of their mutual approbation.

The mind, as well as the body, has its needs: those of the body are the
basis of society, those of the mind its ornaments.

So long as government and law provide for the security and well-being
of men in their common life, the arts, literature and the sciences,
less despotic though perhaps more powerful, fling garlands of flowers
over the chains which weigh them down. They stifle in men's breasts
that sense of original liberty, for which they seem to have been born;
cause them to love their own slavery, and so make of them what is
called a civilised people.

Necessity raised up thrones; the arts and sciences have made them
strong. Powers of the earth, cherish all talents and protect those who
cultivate them.[1] Civilised peoples, cultivate such pursuits: to them,
happy slaves, you owe that delicacy and exquisiteness of taste, which
is so much your boast, that sweetness of disposition and urbanity of
manners which make intercourse so easy and agreeable among you--in a
word, the appearance of all the virtues, without being in possession of
one of them.

It was for this sort of accomplishment, which is by so much the more
captivating as it seems less affected, that Athens and Rome were
so much distinguished in the boasted times of their splendour and
magnificence: and it is doubtless in the same respect that our own age
and nation will excel all periods and peoples. An air of philosophy
without pedantry; an address at once natural and engaging, distant
equally from Teutonic clumsiness and Italian pantomime; these are
the effects of a taste acquired by liberal studies and improved by
conversation with the world. What happiness would it be for those who
live among us, if our external appearance were always a true mirror of
our hearts; if decorum were but virtue; if the maxims we professed were
the rules of our conduct; and if real philosophy were inseparable from
the title of a philosopher! But so many good qualities too seldom go
together; virtue rarely appears in so much pomp and state.

Richness of apparel may proclaim the man of fortune, and elegance the
man of taste; but true health and manliness are known by different
signs. It is under the home-spun of the labourer, and not beneath the
gilt and tinsel of the courtier, that we should look for strength and
vigour of body.

External ornaments are no less foreign to virtue, which is the strength
and activity of the mind. The honest man is an athlete, who loves to
wrestle stark naked; he scorns all those vile trappings, which prevent
the exertion of his strength, and were, for the most part, invented
only to conceal some deformity.

Before art had moulded our behaviour, and taught our passions to speak
an artificial language, our morals were rude but natural; and the
different ways in which we behaved proclaimed at the first glance die
difference of our dispositions. Human nature was not at bottom better
then than now; but men found their security in the ease with which
they could see through one another, and this advantage, of which we no
longer feel the value, prevented their having many vices.

In our day, now that more subtle study and a more refined taste have
reduced the art of pleasing to a system, there prevails in modern
manners a servile and deceptive conformity; so that one would think
every mind had been cast in the same mould. Politeness requires this
thing; decorum that; ceremony has its forms, and fashion its laws, and
these we must always follow, never the promptings of our own nature.

We no longer dare seem what we really are, but lie under a perpetual
restraint; in the meantime the herd of men, which we call society, all
act under the same circumstances exactly alike, unless very particular
and powerful motives prevent them. Thus we never know with whom we have
to deal; and even to know our friends we must wait for some critical
and pressing occasion; that is, till it is too late; for it is on those
very occasions that such knowledge is of use to us.

What a train of vices must attend this uncertainty! Sincere
friendship, real esteem, and perfect confidence are banished from
among men. Jealousy, suspicion, fear, coldness, reserve, hate and
fraud lie constantly concealed under that uniform and deceitful veil
of politeness; that boasted candour and urbanity, for which we are
indebted to the light and leading of this age. We shall no longer take
in vain by our oaths the name of our Creator; but we shall insult Him
with our blasphemies, and our scrupulous ears will take no offence.
We have grown too modest to brag of our own deserts; but we do not
scruple to decry those of others. We do not grossly outrage even our
enemies, but artfully calumniate them. Our hatred of other nations
diminishes, but patriotism dies with it. Ignorance is held in contempt;
but a dangerous scepticism has succeeded it. Some vices indeed are
condemned and others grown dishonourable; but we have still many that
are honoured with the names of virtues, and it is become necessary
that we should either have, or at least pretend to have them. Let who
will extol the moderation of our modern sages, I see nothing in it but
a refinement of intemperance as unworthy of my commendation as their
artificial simplicity.[2]

Such is the purity to which our morals have attained; this is the
virtue we have made our own. Let the arts and sciences claim the share
they have had in this salutary work. I shall add but one reflection
more; suppose an inhabitant of some distant country should endeavour
to form an idea of European morals from the state of the sciences, the
perfection of the arts, the propriety of our public entertainments,
the politeness of our behaviour, the affability of our conversation,
our constant professions of benevolence, and from those tumultuous
assemblies of people of all ranks, who seem, from morning till night,
to have no other care than to oblige one another. Such a stranger, I
maintain, would arrive at a totally false view of our morality.

Where there is no effect, it is idle to look for a cause: but here
the effect is certain and the depravity actual; our minds have been
corrupted in proportion as the arts and sciences have improved. Will
it be said, that this is a misfortune peculiar to the present age? No,
gentlemen, the evils resulting from our vain curiosity are as old as
the world. The daily ebb and flow of the tides are not more regularly
influenced by the moon, than the morals of a people by the progress
of the arts and sciences. As their light has risen above our horizon,
virtue has taken flight, and the same phenomenon has been constantly
observed in all times and places.

Take Egypt, the first school of mankind, that ancient country, famous
for its fertility under a brazen sky; the spot from which Sesostris
once set out to conquer the world. Egypt became the mother of
philosophy and the fine arts; soon she was conquered by Cambyses, and
then successively by the Greeks, the Romans, the Arabs, and finally the
Turks.

Take Greece, once peopled by heroes, who twice vanquished Asia.
Letters, as yet in their infancy, had not corrupted the disposition
of its inhabitants; but the progress of the sciences soon produced a
dissoluteness of manners, and the imposition of the Macedonian yoke:
from which time Greece, always learned, always voluptuous and always a
slave, has experienced amid all its revolutions no more than a change
of masters. Not all the eloquence of Demosthenes could breathe life
into a body which luxury and the arts had once enervated.

It was not till the days of Ennius and Terence that Rome, founded by
a shepherd, and made illustrious by I peasants, began to degenerate.
But after the appearance of an Ovid, a Catullus, a Martial, and the
rest of those numerous obscene authors, whose very names are enough to
put modesty to the blush, Rome, once the shrine of virtue, became the
theatre of vice, a scorn among the nations, and an object of derision
even to barbarians. Thus the capital of the world at length submitted
to the yoke of slavery it had imposed on others, and the very day
of its fall was the eve of that on which it conferred on one of its
citizens the title of Arbiter of Good Taste.

What shall I say of that metropolis of the Eastern Empire, which, by
its situation, seemed destined to be the capital of the world; that
refuge of the arts and sciences, when they were banished from the rest
of Europe, more perhaps by wisdom than barbarism? The most profligate
debaucheries, the most abandoned villainies, the most atrocious crimes,
plots, murders and assassinations form the warp and woof of the
history of Constantinople. Such is the pure source from which have
flowed to us the floods of knowledge on which the present age so prides
itself.

But wherefore should we seek, in past ages, for proofs of a truth, of
which the present affords us ample evidence? There is in Asia a vast
empire, where learning is held in honour, and leads to the highest
dignities in the state. If the sciences improved our morals, if they
inspired us with courage and taught us to lay down our lives for the
good of our country, the Chinese should be wise, free and invincible.
But, if there be no vice they do not practise, no crime with which they
are not familiar; if the sagacity of their ministers, the supposed
wisdom of their laws, and the multitude of inhabitants who people that
vast empire, have alike failed to preserve them from the yoke of the
rude and ignorant Tartars, of what use were their men of science and
literature? What advantage has that country reaped from the honours
bestowed on its learned men? Can it be that of being peopled by a race
of scoundrels and slaves?

Contrast with these instances the morals of those few nations which,
being preserved from the contagion of useless knowledge, have by
their virtues become happy in themselves and afforded an example to
the rest of the world. Such were the first inhabitants of Persia,
a nation so singular that virtue was taught among them in the same
manner as the sciences are with us. They very easily subdued Asia,
and possess the exclusive glory of having had the history of their
political institutions regarded as a philosophical romance. Such were
the Scythians, of whom such wonderful eulogies have come down to us.
Such were the Germans, whose simplicity, innocence and virtue, afforded
a most delightful contrast to the pen of an historian, weary of
describing the baseness and villainies of an enlightened, opulent and
voluptuous nation. Such had been even Rome in the days of its poverty
and ignorance. And such has shown itself to be, even in our own times,
that rustic nation, whose justly renowned courage not even adversity
could conquer, and whose fidelity no example could corrupt.[3]

It is not through stupidity that the people have preferred other
activities to those of the mind. They were not ignorant that in other
countries there were men who spent their time in disputing idly about
the sovereign good, and about vice and virtue. They knew that these
useless thinkers were lavish in their own praises, and stigmatised
other nations contemptuously as barbarians. But they noted the morals
of these people, and so learnt what to think of their learning.[4]

Can it be forgotten that, in the very heart of Greece, there arose
a city as famous for the happy ignorance of its inhabitants, as for
the wisdom of its laws; a republic of demi-gods rather than of men,
so greatly superior their virtues seemed to those of mere humanity?
Sparta, eternal proof of the vanity of science, while the vices, under
the conduct of the fine arts, were being introduced into Athens, even
while its tyrant was carefully collecting together the works of the
prince of poets, was driving from her walls artists and the arts, the
learned and their learning!

The difference was seen in the outcome. Athens became the seat of
politeness and taste, the country of orators and philosophers. The
elegance of its buildings equalled that of its language; on every side
might be seen marble and canvas, animated by the hands of the most
skilful artists. From Athens we derive those astonishing performances,
which will serve as models to every corrupt age. The picture of
Lacedæmon is not so highly coloured. There, the neighbouring nations
used to say, "men were born virtuous, their native air seeming to
inspire them with virtue." But its inhabitants have left us nothing but
the memory of their heroic actions: monuments that should not count for
less in our eyes than the most curious relics of Athenian marble.

It is true that, among the Athenians, there were some few wise men who
withstood the general torrent, and preserved their integrity even in
the company of the muses. But hear the judgment which the principal,
and most unhappy of them, passed on the artists and learned men of his
day.

"I have considered the poets," says he, "and I look upon them as people
whose talents impose both on themselves and on others; they give
themselves out for wise men, and are taken for such; but in reality
they are anything sooner than that."

"From the poets," continues Socrates, "I turned to the artists. Nobody
was more ignorant of the arts than myself; nobody was more fully
persuaded that the artists were possessed of amazing knowledge. I soon
discovered, however, that they were in as bad a way as the poets, and
that both had fallen into the same misconception. Because the most
skilful of them excel others in their particular jobs, they think
themselves wiser than all the rest of mankind. This arrogance spoilt
all their skill in my eyes, so that, putting myself in the place of
the oracle, and asking myself whether I would rather be what I am or
what they are, know what they know, or know that I know nothing, I very
readily answered, for myself and the god, that I had rather remain as I
am.

"None of us, neither the sophists, nor the poets, nor the orators, nor
the artists, nor I, know what is the nature of the _true_, the _good_,
or the _beautiful_. But there is this difference between us; that,
though none of these people know anything, they all think they know
something; whereas for my part, if I know nothing, I am at least in no
doubt of my ignorance. So the superiority of wisdom, imputed to me by
the oracle, is reduced merely to my being fully convinced that I am
ignorant of what I do not know."

Thus we find Socrates, the wisest of men in the judgment of the god,
and the most learned of all the Athenians in the opinion of all Greece,
speaking in praise of ignorance. Were he alive now, there is little
reason to think that our modern scholars and artists would induce him
to change his mind. No, gentlemen, that honest man would still persist
in despising our vain sciences. He would lend no aid to swell the flood
of books that flows from every quarter: he would leave to us, as he did
to his disciples, only the example and memory of his virtues; that is
the noblest method of instructing mankind.

Socrates had begun at Athens, and the elder Cato proceeded at Rome, to
inveigh against those seductive and subtle Greeks, who corrupted the
virtue and destroyed the courage of their fellow-citizens: culture,
however, prevailed. Rome was filled with philosophers and orators,
military discipline was neglected, agriculture was held in contempt,
men formed sects, and forgot their country. To the sacred names of
liberty, disinterestedness and obedience to law, succeeded those of
Epicurus, Zeno and Arcesilaus. It was even a saying among their own
philosophers that since learned men appeared among them, honest men had
been in eclipse. Before that time the Romans were satisfied with the
practice of virtue; they were undone when they began to study it.

What would the great soul of Fabricius have felt, if it had been
his misfortune to be called back to life, when he saw the pomp and
magnificence of that Rome, which his arm had saved from ruin, and
his honourable name made more illustrious than all its conquests.
"Ye gods!" he would have said, "what has become of those thatched
roofs and rustic hearths, which were formerly the habitations of
temperance and virtue? What fatal splendour has succeeded the ancient
Roman simplicity? What is this foreign language, this effeminacy of
manners? What is the meaning of these statues, paintings and buildings?
Fools, what have you done? You, the lords of the earth, have made
yourselves the slaves of the frivolous nations you have subdued.
You are governed by rhetoricians, and it has been only to enrich
architects, painters, sculptors and stage-players that you have watered
Greece and Asia with your blood. Even the spoils of Carthage are the
prize of a flute-player. Romans! Romans! make haste to demolish those
amphitheatres, break to pieces those statues, burn those paintings;
drive from among you those slaves who keep you in subjection, and whose
fatal arts are corrupting your morals. Let other hands make themselves
illustrious by such vain talents; the only talent worthy of Rome is
that of conquering the world and making virtue its ruler. When Cyneas
took the Roman senate for an assembly of kings, he was not struck by
either useless pomp or studied elegance. He heard there none of that
futile eloquence, which is now the study and the charm of frivolous
orators. What then was the majesty that Cyneas beheld? Fellow citizens,
he saw the noblest sight that ever existed under heaven, a sight which
not all your riches or your arts can show; an assembly of two hundred
virtuous men, worthy to command in Rome, and to govern the world."

But let pass the distance of time and place, and let us see what has
happened in our own time and country; or rather let us banish odious
descriptions that might offend our delicacy, and spare ourselves the
pains of repeating the same tilings under different names. It was not
for nothing that I invoked the Manes of Fabricius; for what have I
put into his mouth, that might not have come with as much propriety
from Louis the Twelfth or Henry the Fourth? It is true that in France
Socrates would not have drunk the hemlock, but he would have drunk of
a potion infinitely more bitter, of insult, mockery and contempt a
hundred times worse than death.

Thus it is that luxury, profligacy and slavery, have been, in all ages,
the scourge of the efforts of our pride to emerge from that happy
state of ignorance, in which the wisdom of providence had placed us.
That thick veil with which it has covered all its operations seems to
be a sufficient proof that it never designed us for such fruitless
researches. But is there, indeed, one lesson it has taught us, by which
we have rightly profited, or which we have neglected with impunity? Let
men learn for once that nature would have preserved them from science,
as a mother snatches a dangerous weapon from the hands of her child.
Let them know that all the secrets she hides are so many evils from
which she protects them, and that the very difficulty they find in
acquiring knowledge is not the least of her bounty towards them. Men
are perverse; but they would have been far worse, if they had had the
misfortune to be born learned.

How humiliating are these reflections to humanity, and how mortified
by them our pride should be! What! it will be asked, is uprightness
the child of ignorance? Is virtue inconsistent with learning? What
consequences might not be drawn from such suppositions? But to
reconcile these apparent contradictions, we need only examine closely
the emptiness and vanity of those pompous titles, which are so
liberally bestowed on human knowledge, and which so blind our judgment.
Let us consider, therefore, the arts and sciences in themselves. Let us
see what must result from their advancement, and let us not hesitate
to admit the truth of all those points on which our arguments coincide
with the inductions we can make from history.


[1] Sovereigns always see with, pleasure a taste for the arts of
amusement and superfluity, which do not result in the exportation of
bullion, increase among their subjects. They very well know that,
besides nourishing that littleness of mind which is proper to slavery,
the increase of artificial wants only binds so many more chains upon
the people. Alexander, wishing to keep the Ichthyophages in a state
of dependence, compelled them to give up fishing, and subsist on the
customary food of civilised nations. The American savages, who go
naked, and live entirely on the products of the chase, have been always
impossible to subdue. What yoke, indeed, can be imposed on men who
stand in need of nothing?

[2] "I love," said Montaigne, "to converse and hold an argument; but
only with very few people, and that for my own gratification. For to do
so, by way of affording amusement for the great, or of making a parade
of one's talents, is, in my opinion, a trade very ill-becoming a man of
honour." It is the trade of all our intellectuals, save one.

[3] I dare not speak of those happy nations, who did not even know the
name of many vices, which we find it difficult to suppress; the savages
of America, whose simple and natural mode of government Montaigne
preferred, without hesitation, not only to the laws of Plato, but to
the most perfect visions of government philosophy can ever suggest He
cites many examples, striking for those who are capable of appreciating
them. But, what of all that, says he, they can't run to a pair of
breeches!

[4] What are we to think was the real opinion of the Athenians
themselves about eloquence, when they were so very careful to banish
declamation from that upright tribunal, against whose decision even
their gods made no appeal? What did the Romans think of physicians,
when they expelled medicine from the republic? And when the relics of
humanity left among the Spaniards induced them to forbid their lawyers
to set foot in America, what must they have thought of jurisprudence?
May it not be said that they thought, by this single expedient, to make
reparation for all the outrages they had committed against the unhappy
Indians?




THE SECOND PART


An ancient tradition passed out of Egypt into Greece, that some god,
who was an enemy to the repose of mankind, was the inventor of the
sciences.[1] What must the Egyptians, among whom the sciences first
arose, have thought of them? And they beheld, near at hand, the sources
from which they sprang. In fact, whether we turn to the annals of the
world, or eke out with philosophical investigations the uncertain
chronicles of history, we shall not find for human knowledge an origin
answering to the idea we are pleased to entertain of it at present.
Astronomy was born of superstition, eloquence of ambition, hatred,
falsehood and flattery; geometry of avarice; physics of an idle
curiosity; and even moral philosophy of human pride. Thus the arts and
sciences owe their birth to our vices; we should be less doubtful of
their advantages, if they had sprung from our virtues.

Their evil origin is, indeed, but too plainly reproduced in their
objects. What would become of the arts, were they not cherished by
luxury? If men were not unjust, of what use were jurisprudence?
What would become of history, if there were no tyrants, wars,
or conspiracies? In a word, who would pass his life in barren
speculations, if everybody, attentive only to the obligations of
humanity and the necessities of nature, spent his whole life in serving
his country, obliging his friends, and relieving the unhappy? Are we
then made to live and die on the brink of that well at the bottom of
which Truth lies hid? This reflection alone is, in my opinion, enough
to discourage at first setting out every man who seriously endeavours
to instruct himself by the study of philosophy.

What a variety of dangers surrounds us! What a number of wrong paths
present themselves in the investigation of the sciences! Through how
many errors, more perilous than truth itself is useful, must we not
pass to arrive at it? The disadvantages we lie under are evident; for
falsehood is capable of an infinite variety of combinations; but the
truth has only one manner of being. Besides, where is the man who
sincerely desires to find it? Or even admitting his good will, by
what characteristic marks is he sure of knowing it? Amid the infinite
diversity of opinions where is the criterion[2] by which we may
certainly judge of it? Again, what is still more difficult, should we
even be fortunate enough to discover it, who among us will know how to
make right use of it?

If our sciences are futile in the objects they propose, they are
no less dangerous in the effects they produce. Being the effect of
idleness, they generate idleness in their turn; and an irreparable
loss of time is the first prejudice which they must necessarily cause
to society. To live without doing some good is a great evil as well in
the political as in the moral world; and hence every useless citizen
should be regarded as a pernicious person. Tell me then, illustrious
philosophers, of whom we learn the ratios in which attraction acts in
vacuo; and in the revolution of the planets, the relations of spaces
traversed in equal times; by whom we are taught what curves have
conjugate points, points of inflexion, and cusps; how the soul and body
correspond, like two clocks, without actual communication; what planets
may be inhabited; and what insects reproduce in an extraordinary
manner. Answer me, I say, you from whom we receive all this sublime
information, whether we should have been less numerous, worse governed,
less formidable, less flourishing, or more perverse, supposing you had
taught us none of all these fine things.

Reconsider therefore the importance of your productions; and, since
the labours of the most enlightened of our learned men and the best of
our citizens are of so little utility, tell us what we ought to think
of that numerous herd of obscure writers and useless litterateurs, who
devour without any return the substance of the State.

Useless, do I say? Would God they were! Society would be more peaceful,
and morals less corrupt. But these vain and futile declaimers go forth
on all sides, armed with their fatal paradoxes, to sap the foundations
of our faith, and nullify virtue. They smile contemptuously at such
old names as patriotism and religion, and consecrate their talents and
philosophy to the destruction; and defamation of all that men hold
sacred. Not that they bear any real hatred to virtue or dogma; they are
the enemies of public opinion alone; to bring them to the foot of the
altar, it would be enough to banish them to a land of atheists. What
extravagancies will not the rage of singularity induce men to commit!

The waste of time is certainly a great evil; but still greater evils
attend upon literature and the arts. One is luxury, produced like
them by indolence and vanity. Luxury is seldom unattended by the arts
and sciences; and they are always attended by luxury. I know that our
philosophy, fertile in paradoxes, pretends, in contradiction to the
experience of all ages, that luxury contributes to the splendour of
States. But, without insisting on the necessity of sumptuary laws, can
it be denied that rectitude of morals is essential to the duration of
empires, and that luxury is diametrically opposed to such rectitude?
Let it be admitted that luxury is a certain indication of wealth; that
it even serves, if you will, to increase such wealth: what conclusion
is to be drawn from this paradox, so worthy of the times? And what
will become of virtue if riches are to be acquired at any cost? The
politicians of the ancient world were always talking of morals and
virtue; ours speak of nothing but commerce and money. One of them will
tell you that in such a country a man is worth just as much as he will
sell for at Algiers: another, pursuing the same mode of calculation,
finds that in some countries a man is worth nothing, and in others
still less than nothing; they value men as they do droves of oxen.
According to them, a man is worth no more to the State, than the
amount he consumes; and thus a Sybarite would be worth at least thirty
Lacedæmonians. Let these writers tell me, however, which of the two
republics, Sybaris or Sparta, was subdued by a handful of peasants, and
which became the terror of Asia.

The monarchy of Cyrus was conquered by thirty thousand men, led by a
prince poorer than the meanest of Persian Satraps: in like manner the
Scythians, the poorest of all nations, were able to resist the most
powerful monarchs of the universe. When two famous republics contended
for the empire of the world, the one rich and the other poor, the
former was subdued by the latter. The Roman empire in its turn, after
having engulfed all the riches of the universe, fell a prey to peoples
who knew not even what riches were. The Franks conquered the Gauls, and
the Saxons England, without any other treasures than their bravery and
their poverty. A band of poor mountaineers, whose whole cupidity was
confined to the possession of a few sheep-skins, having first given a
check to the arrogance of Austria, went on to crush the opulent and
formidable house of Burgundy, which at that time made the potentates
of Europe tremble. In short, all the power and wisdom of the heir of
Charles the Fifth, backed by all the treasures of the Indies, broke
before a few herring-fishers. Let our politicians condescend to lay
aside their calculations for a moment, to reflect on these examples;
let them learn for once that money, though it buys everything else,
cannot buy morals and citizens. What then is the precise point in
dispute about luxury? It is to know which is most advantageous to
empires, that their existence should be brilliant and momentary,
or virtuous and lasting? I say brilliant, but with what lustre! A
taste for ostentation never prevails in the same minds as a taste
for honesty. No, it is impossible that understandings, degraded by a
multitude of futile cares, should ever rise to what is truly great and
noble; even if they had the strength, they would want the courage.

Every artist loves applause. The praise of his contemporaries is the
most valuable part of his recompense. What then will he do to obtain
it, if he have the misfortune to be born among a people, and at a
time, when learning is in vogue, and the superficiality of youth is
in a position to lead the fashion; when men have sacrificed their
taste to those who tyrannise over their liberty, and one sex dare not
approve anything but what is proportionate to the pusillanimity of
the other;[3] when the greatest masterpieces of dramatic poetry are
condemned, and the noblest of musical productions neglected? This is
what he will do. He will lower his genius to the level of the age, and
will rather submit to compose mediocre works, that will be admired
during his life-time, than labour at sublime achievements which will
not be admired till long after he is dead. Let the famous Voltaire tell
us how many nervous and masculine beauties he has sacrificed to our
false delicacy, and how much that is great and noble, that spirit of
gallantry, which delights in what is frivolous and petty, has cost him.

It is thus that the dissolution of morals, the necessary consequence of
luxury, brings with it in its turn the corruption of taste. Further, if
by chance there be found among men of average ability, an individual
with enough strength of mind to refuse to comply with the spirit of
the age, and to debase himself by puerile productions, his lot will
be hard. He will die in indigence and oblivion. This is not so much a
prediction, as a fact already confirmed by experience! Yes, Carle and
Pierre Vanloo, the time is already come when your pencils, destined to
increase the majesty of our temples by sublime and holy images, must
fall from your hands, or else be prostituted to adorn the panels of a
coach with lascivious paintings. And you, inimitable Pigal, rival of
Phidias and Praxiteles, whose chisel the ancients would have employed
to carve them gods, whose images almost excuse their idolatry in our
eyes; even your hand must condescend to fashion the belly of an ape, or
else remain idle.

We cannot reflect on the morality of mankind without contemplating with
pleasure the picture of the simplicity which prevailed in the earliest
times. This image may be justly compared to a beautiful coast, adorned
only by the hands of nature; towards which our eyes are constantly
turned, and which we see receding with regret. While men were innocent
and virtuous and loved to have the gods for witnesses of their actions,
they dwelt together in the same huts; but when they became vicious,
they grew tired of such inconvenient onlookers, and banished them to
magnificent temples. Finally, they expelled their deities even from
these, in order to dwell there themselves; or at least the temples
of the gods were no longer more magnificent than the palaces of the
citizens. This was the height of degeneracy; nor could vice ever be
carried to greater lengths than when it was seen, supported, as it
were, at the doors of the great, on columns of marble, and graven on
Corinthian capitals.

As the conveniences of life increase, as the arts are brought to
perfection, and luxury spreads, true courage flags, the virtues
disappear; and all this is the effect of the sciences and of those
arts which are exercised in the privacy of men's dwellings. When the
Goths ravaged Greece, the libraries only escaped the flames owing to an
opinion that was set on foot among them, that it was best to leave the
enemy with a possession so calculated to divert their attention from
military exercises, and keep them engaged in indolent and sedentary
occupations.

Charles the Eighth found himself master of Tuscany and the kingdom of
Naples, almost without drawing sword; and all his court attributed
this unexpected success to the fact that the princes and nobles of
Italy applied themselves with greater earnestness to the cultivation
of their understandings than to active and martial pursuits. In fact,
says the sensible person who records these characteristics, experience
plainly tells us, that in military matters and all that resemble them
application to the sciences tends rather to make men effeminate and
cowardly than resolute and vigorous.

The Romans confessed that military virtue was extinguished among them,
in proportion as they became connoisseurs in the arts of the painter,
the engraver and the goldsmith, and began to cultivate the fine arts.
Indeed, as if this famous country was to be for ever an example to
other nations, the rise of the Medici and the revival of letters has
once more destroyed, this time perhaps for ever, the martial reputation
which Italy seemed a few centuries ago to have recovered.

The ancient republics of Greece, with that wisdom which was so
conspicuous in most of their institutions, forbade their citizens
to pursue all those inactive and sedentary occupations, which by
enervating and corrupting the body diminish also the vigour of the
mind. With what courage, in fact, can it be thought that hunger and
thirst, fatigues, dangers and death, can be faced by men whom the
smallest want overwhelms and the slightest difficulty repels? With what
resolution can soldiers support the excessive toils of war, when they
are entirely unaccustomed to them? With what spirits can they make
forced marches under officers who have not even the strength to travel
on horseback? It is no answer to cite the reputed valour of all the
modern warriors who are so scientifically trained. I hear much of their
bravery in a day's battle; but I am told nothing of how they support
excessive fatigue, how they stand the severity of the seasons and the
inclemency of the weather. A little sunshine or snow, or the want
of a few superfluities, is enough to cripple and destroy one of our
finest armies in a few days. Intrepid warriors I permit me for once to
tell you the truth, which you seldom hear. Of your bravery I am fully
satisfied. I have no doubt that you would have triumphed with Hannibal
at Cannæ, and at Trasimene: that you would have passed the Rubicon
with Cæsar, and enabled him to enslave his country; but you never would
have been able to cross the Alps with the former, or with the latter to
subdue your own ancestors, the Gauls.

A war does not always depend on the events of battle: there is in
generalship an art superior to that of gaining victories. A man may
behave with great intrepidity under fire, and yet be a very had
officer. Even in the common soldier, a little more Strength and vigour
would perhaps be more useful than so much courage, which after all is
no protection from death. And what does it matter to the State whether
its troops perish by cold and fever, or by the sword of the enemy?

If the cultivation of the sciences is prejudicial to military
qualities, it is still more so to moral qualities. Even from our
infancy an absurd system of education serves to adorn our wit and
corrupt our judgment. We see, on every side, huge institutions, where
our youth are educated at great expense, and instructed in everything
but their duty. Your children will be ignorant of their own language,
when they can talk others which are not spoken anywhere. They will be
able to compose verses which they can hardly understand; and, without
being capable of distinguishing truth from error, they will possess
the art of making them unrecognisable by specious arguments. But
magnanimity, equity, temperance, humanity and courage will be words of
which they know not the meaning. The dear name of country will never
strike on their ears; and if they ever hear speak of God,[4] it will
be less to fear, than to be frightened of Him. I would as soon, said a
wise man, that my pupil had spent his time in the tennis court as in
this manner; for there his body at least would have got exercise.

I well know that children ought to be kept employed, and that idleness
is for them the danger most to be feared. But what should they be
taught? This is undoubtedly an important question. Let them be taught
what they are to practise when they come to be men;[5] not what they
ought to forget.

Our gardens are adorned with statues and our galleries with pictures.
What would you imagine these masterpieces of art, thus exhibited to
public admiration, represent? The great men, who have defended their
country, or the still greater men who have enriched it by their
virtues? Far from it. They are the images of every perversion of heart
and mind, carefully selected from ancient mythology, and presented
to the early curiosity of our children, doubtless that they may have
before their eyes the representations of vicious actions, even before
they are able to read.

Whence arise all those abuses, unless it be from that fatal inequality
introduced among men by the difference of talents and the cheapening
of virtue? This is the most evident effect of all our studies, and the
most dangerous of all their consequences. The question is no longer
whether a man is honest, but whether he is clever. We do not ask
whether a book is useful, but whether it is well-written. Rewards are
lavished on wit and ingenuity, while virtue is left unhonoured. There
are a thousand prizes for fine discourses, and none for good actions.
I should be glad, however, to know whether the honour attaching to the
best discourse that ever wins the prize in this Academy is comparable
with the merit of having founded the prize.

A wise man does not go in chase of fortune; but he is by no means
insensible to glory, and when he sees it so ill distributed, his
virtue, which might have been animated by a little emulation, and
turned to the advantage of society, droops and dies away in obscurity
and indigence. It is for this reason that the agreeable arts must in
time everywhere be preferred to the useful; and this truth has been but
too much confirmed since the revival of the arts and sciences. We have
physicists, geometricians, chemists, astronomers, poets, musicians, and
painters in plenty; but we have no longer a citizen among us; or if
there be found a few scattered over our abandoned countryside, they are
left to perish there unnoticed and neglected. Such is the condition to
which we are reduced, and such are our feelings towards those who give
us our daily bread, and our children milk.

I confess, however, that the evil is not so great as it might
have become. The eternal providence, in placing salutary simples
beside noxious plants, and making poisonous animals contain their
own antidote, has taught the sovereigns of the earth, who are its
ministers, to imitate its wisdom. It is by following this example that
the truly great monarch, to whose glory every age will add new lustre,
drew from the very bosom of the arts and sciences, the very fountains
of a thousand lapses from rectitude, those famous societies, which,
while they are depositaries of the dangerous trust of human knowledge,
are yet the sacred guardians of morals, by the attention they pay to
their maintenance among themselves in all their purity, and by the
demands which they make on every member whom they admit.

These wise institutions, confirmed by his august successor and
imitated by all the kings of Europe, will serve at least to restrain
men of letters, who, all aspiring to the honour of being admitted
into these Academies, will keep watch over themselves, and endeavour
to make themselves worthy of such honour by useful performances and
irreproachable morals. Those Academies also, which, in proposing prizes
for literary merit, make choice of such subjects as are calculated to
arouse the love of virtue in the hearts of citizens, prove that it
prevails in themselves, and must give men the rare and real pleasure of
finding learned societies devoting themselves to the enlightenment of
mankind, not only by agreeable exercises of the intellect, but also by
useful instructions.

An objection which may be made is, in fact, only an additional proof of
my argument. So much precaution proves but too evidently the need for
it. We never seek remedies for evils that do not exist. Why, indeed,
must these bear all the marks of ordinary remedies, on account of their
inefficacy? The numerous establishments in favour of the learned are
only adapted to make men mistake the objects of the sciences, and turn
men's attention to the cultivation of them. One would be inclined to
think, from the precautions everywhere taken, that we are overstocked
with husbandmen, and are afraid of a shortage of philosophers. I
will not venture here to enter into a comparison between agriculture
and philosophy, as they would not bear it. I shall only ask What is
philosophy? What is contained in the writings of the most celebrated
philosophers? What are the lessons of these friends of wisdom. To hear
them, should we not take them for so many mountebanks, exhibiting
themselves in public, and crying out, _Here, Here, come to me, I am
the only true doctor_? One of them teaches that there is no such thing
as matter, but that everything exists only in representation. Another
declares that there is no other substance than matter, and no other
God than the world itself. A third tells you that there are no such
things as virtue and vice, and that moral good and evil are chimeras;
while a fourth informs you that men are only beasts of prey, and may
conscientiously devour one another. Why, my great philosophers, do you
not reserve these wise and profitable lessons for your friends and
children? You would soon reap the benefit of them, nor should we be
under any apprehension of our own becoming your disciples.

Such are the wonderful men, whom their contemporaries held in the
highest esteem during their lives, and to whom immortality has been
attributed since their decease. Such are the wise maxims we have
received from them, and which are transmitted, from age to age, to our
descendants. Paganism, though given over to all the extravagances of
human reason, has left nothing to compare with the shameful monuments
which have been prepared by the art of printing, during the reign of
the gospel. The impious writings of Leucippus and Diagoras perished
with their authors. The world, in their days, was ignorant of the art
of immortalising the errors and extravagancies of the human mind.
But thanks to the art of printing[6] and the use we make of it, the
pernicious reflections of Hobbes and Spinoza will last for ever.
Go, famous writings, of which the ignorance and rusticity of our
forefathers would have been incapable. Go to our descendants, along
with those still more pernicious works which reek of the corrupted
manners of the present age! Let them together convey to posterity
a faithful history of the progress and advantages of our arts and
sciences. If they are read, they will leave not a doubt about the
question we are now discussing, and unless mankind should then be still
more foolish than we, they will lift up their hands to Heaven and
exclaim in bitterness of heart: "Almighty God! thou who holdest in Thy
hand the minds of men, deliver us from the fatal arts and sciences of
our forefathers; give us back ignorance, innocence and poverty, which
alone can make us happy and are precious in Thy sight."

But if the progress of the arts and sciences has added nothing to our
real happiness; if it has corrupted our morals, and if that corruption
has vitiated our taste, what are we to think of the herd of text-book
authors, who have removed those impediments which nature purposely laid
in the way to the Temple of the Muses, in order to guard its approach
and try the powers of those who might be tempted to seek knowledge?
What are we to think of those compilers who have indiscreetly broken
open the door of the sciences, and introduced into their sanctuary a
populace unworthy to approach it, when it was greatly to be wished that
all who should be found incapable of making a considerable progress in
the career of learning should have been repulsed at the entrance, and
thereby cast upon those arts which are useful to society. A man who
will be all his life a bad versifier, or a third-rate geometrician,
might have made nevertheless an excellent clothier. Those whom nature
intended for her disciples have not needed masters. Bacon, Descartes
and Newton, those teachers of mankind, had themselves no teachers.
What guide indeed could have taken them so far as their sublime
genius directed them? Ordinary masters would only have cramped their
intelligence, by confining it within the narrow limits of their own
capacity. It was from the obstacles they met with at first, that they
learned to exert themselves, and bestirred themselves to traverse the
vast field which they covered. If it be proper to allow some men to
apply themselves to the study of the arts and sciences, it is only
those who feel themselves able to walk alone in their footsteps and to
outstrip them. It belongs only to these few to raise monuments to the
glory of the human understanding. But if we are desirous that nothing
should be above their genius, nothing should be beyond their hopes.
This is the only encouragement they require. The soul insensibly adapts
itself to the objects on which it is employed, and thus it is that
great occasions produce great men. The greatest orator in the world
was Consul of Rome, and perhaps the greatest of philosophers Lord
Chancellor of England. Can it be conceived that, if the former had
only been a professor at some University, and the latter a pensioner
of some Academy, their works would not have suffered from their
situation. Let not princes disdain to admit into their councils those
who are most capable of giving them good advice. Let them renounce the
old prejudice, which was invented by the pride of the great, that the
art of governing mankind is more difficult than that of instructing
them; as if it was easier to induce men to do good voluntarily, than
to compel them to it by force. Let the learned of the first rank find
an honourable refuge in their courts; let them there enjoy the only
recompense worthy of them, that of promoting by their influence the
happiness of the peoples they have enlightened by their wisdom. It is
by this means only that we are likely to see what virtue, science and
authority can do, when animated by the noblest emulation, and working
unanimously for the happiness of mankind.

But so long as power alone is on one side, and knowledge and
Understanding alone on the other, the learned will seldom make great
objects their study, princes will still more rarely do great actions,
and the peoples will continue to be, as they are, mean, corrupt and
miserable.

As for us, ordinary men, on whom Heaven has not been pleased to bestow
such great talents; as we are not destined to reap such glory, let
us remain in our obscurity. Let us not covet a reputation we should
never attain, and which, in the present state of things, would never
make up to us for the trouble it would have cost us, even if we were
fully qualified to obtain it. Why should we build our happiness on the
opinions of others, when we can find it in our own hearts? Let us leave
to others the task of instructing mankind in their duty, and confine
ourselves to the discharge of our own. We have no occasion for greater
knowledge than this.

Virtue! sublime science of simple minds, are such industry and
preparation needed if we are to know you? Are not your principles
graven on every heart? Need we do more, to learn your laws, than
examine ourselves, and listen to the voice of conscience, when the
passions are silent?

This is the true philosophy, with which we must learn to be content,
without envying the fame of those celebrated men, whose names are
immortal in the republic of letters. Let us, instead of envying them,
endeavour to make, between them and us, that honourable distinction
which was formerly seen to exist between two great peoples, that the
one knew how to speak, and the other how to act, aright.


[1] It is easy to see the allegory in the fable of Prometheus: and it
does not appear that the Greeks, who chained him to the Caucasus, had a
better opinion of him than the Egyptians had of their god Theutus. The
Satyr, says an ancient fable, the first time he saw a fire, was going
to kiss and embrace it; but Prometheus cried out to him to forbear, or
his beard would rue it. It burns, says he, everything that touches it.

[2] The less we know, the more we think we know. The peripatetics
doubted of nothing. Did not Descartes construct the universe with cubes
and vortices? And is there in all Europe one single physicist who does
not boldly explain the inexplicable mysteries of electricity, which
will, perhaps, be for ever the despair of real philosophers?

[3] I am far from thinking that the ascendancy which women have
obtained over men is an evil in itself. It is a present which nature
has made them for the good of mankind. If better directed, it might
be productive of as much good, as it is now of evil. We are not
sufficiently sensible of what advantage it would be to society to
give a better education to that half of our species which governs the
other. Men will always be what women choose to make them. If you wish
then that they should be noble and virtuous, let women be taught what
greatness of soul and virtue are. The reflections which this subject
arouses, and which Plato formerly made, deserve to be more fully
developed by a pen worthy of following so great a master, and defending
so great a cause.

[4] Pensées philosophiques (Diderot).

[5] Such was the education of the Spartans with regard to one of the
greatest of their-kings. It is well worthy of notice, says Montaigne,
that the excellent institutions of Lycurgus, which were in truth
miraculously perfect, paid as much attention to the bringing up of
youth as if this were their principal object, and yet, at the very seat
of the Muses, they make so little mention of learning that it seems as
if their generous-spirited youth disdained every other restraint, and
required, instead of masters of the sciences, instructors in valour,
prudence and justice alone.

Let us hear next what the same writer says of the ancient Persians.
Plato, says he, relates that the heir to the throne was thus brought
up. At his birth he was committed, not to the care of women, but to
eunuchs in the highest authority and near the person of the king, on
account of their virtue. These undertook to render his body beautiful
and healthy. At seven years of age they taught him to ride and go
hunting. At fourteen he was placed in the hands of four, the wisest,
the most just, the most temperate and the bravest persons in the
kingdom. The first instructed him in religion, the second taught him to
adhere inviolably to truth, the third to conquer his passions, and the
fourth to be afraid of nothing. All, I may add, taught him to be a good
man; but not one taught him to be learned.

Astyages, in Xenophon, desires Cyrus to give him an account of his
last lesson. It was this, answered Cyrus, one of the big boys, of the
school having a small coat, gave it to a little boy and took away from
him his coat, which was larger. Our master having appointed me arbiter
in the dispute, I ordered that matters should stand as they were, as
each boy seemed to be better suited than before. The master, however,
remonstrated with me, saying that I considered only convenience,
whereas justice ought to have been the first concern, and justice
teaches that no one should suffer forcible interference with what
belongs to him. He added that he was punished for his wrong decision,
just as boys are punished in our country schools when they forget
the first aorist of [Greek: _tuptoo_]. My tutor must make me a fine
harangue, _in genere demonstrative_, before he will persuade me that
his school is as good as this.

[6] If we consider the frightful disorders which printing has already
caused in Europe, and judge of the future by the progress of its evils
from day to day, it is easy to foresee that sovereigns will hereafter
take as much pains to banish this dreadful art from their dominions,
as they ever took to encourage it The Sultan Achmet, yielding to the
importunities of certain pretenders to taste, consented to have a press
erected at Constantinople; but it was hardly set to work before they
were obliged to destroy it, and throw the plant into a well.

It is related that the Caliph Omar, being asked what should be done
with the library at Alexandria, answered in these words. "If the books
in the library contain anything contrary to the Alcoran, they are evil
and ought to be burnt; if they contain only what the Alcoran teaches,
they are superfluous." This reasoning has been cited by oar men of
letters as the height of absurdity; but if Gregory the Great had been
in the place of Omar, and the Gospel in the place of the Alcoran, the
library would still have been burnt, and it would have been perhaps the
finest action of his life.




A DISCOURSE

ON A SUBJECT PROPOSED BY THE ACADEMY OF DIJON:

WHAT IS THE ORIGIN OF INEQUALITY AMONG MEN, AND IS IT AUTHORISED BY
NATURAL LAW?

_Non in depravatis, sed in his qua bene secundum naturam se habent,
considerandum est quid sit naturale._

Aristotle, Politics, Bk. i, ch. 2.

[We should consider what is natural not in things which are depraved
but in those which are rightly ordered according to nature.]




DEDICATION

TO THE

REPUBLIC OF GENEVA


MOST HONOURABLE, MAGNIFICENT AND SOVEREIGN LORDS, convinced that
only a virtuous citizen can confer on his country honours which it
can accept, I have been for thirty years past working to make myself
worthy to offer you some public homage; and, this fortunate opportunity
supplementing in some degree the insufficiency of my efforts, I have
thought myself entitled to follow in embracing it the dictates of the
zeal which inspires me, rather than the right which should have been my
authorisation. Having had the happiness to be born among you, how could
I reflect on the equality which nature has ordained between men, and
the inequality which they have introduced, without reflecting on the
profound wisdom by which both are in this State happily combined and
made to coincide, in the manner that is most in conformity with natural
law, and most favourable to society, to the maintenance of public order
and to the happiness of individuals? In my researches after the best
rules common sense can lay down for the constitution of a government,
I have been so struck at finding them all in actuality in your own,
that even had I not been born within your walls I should have thought
it indispensable for me to offer this picture of human society to that
people, which of all others seems to be possessed of its greatest
advantages, and to have best guarded against its abuses.

If I had had to make choice of the place of my birth, I should have
preferred a society which had an extent proportionate to the limits
of the human faculties; that is, to the possibility of being well
governed: in which every person being equal to his occupation, no one
should be obliged to commit to others the functions with which he was
entrusted: a State, in which all the individuals being well known to
one another, neither the secret machinations of vice, nor the modesty
of virtue should be able to escape the notice and judgment of the
public; and in which the pleasant custom of seeing and knowing one
another should make the love of country rather a love of the citizens
than of its soil.

I should have wished to be born in a country in which the interest of
the Sovereign and that of the people must be single and identical; to
the end that all the movements of the machine might tend always to
the general happiness. And as this could not be the case, unless the
Sovereign and the people were one and the same person, it follows that
I should have wished to be born under a democratic government, wisely
tempered.

I should have wished to live and die free: that is, so far subject to
the laws that neither I, nor anybody else, should be able to cast off
their honourable yoke: the easy and salutary yoke which the haughtiest
necks bear with the greater docility, as they are made to bear no other.

I should have wished then that no one within the State should be able
to say he was above the law; and that no one without should be able to
dictate so that the State should be obliged to recognise his authority.
For, be the constitution of a government what it may, if there be
within its jurisdiction a single man who is not subject to the law, all
the rest are necessarily at his discretion. And if there be a national
ruler within, and a foreign ruler without, however they may divide
their authority, it is impossible that both should be duly obeyed, or
that the State should be well governed.

I should not have chosen to live in a republic of recent institution,
however excellent its laws; for fear the government, being perhaps
otherwise framed than the circumstances of the moment might require,
might disagree with the new citizens, or they with it, and the State
run the risk of overthrow and destruction almost as soon as it came
into being. For it is with liberty as it is with those solid and
succulent foods, or with those generous wines which are well adapted
to nourish and fortify robust constitutions that are used to them,
but ruin and intoxicate weak and delicate constitutions to which they
are not suited. Peoples once accustomed to masters are not in a
condition to do without them. If they attempt to shake off the yoke,
they still more estrange themselves from freedom, as, by mistaking for
it an unbridled license to which it is diametrically opposed, they
nearly always manage, by their revolutions, to hand themselves over to
seducers, who only make their chains heavier than before. The Roman
people itself, a model for all free peoples, was wholly incapable of
governing itself when it escaped from the oppression of the Tarquins.
Debased by slavery, and the ignominious tasks which had been imposed
upon it, it was at first no better than a stupid mob, which it was
necessary to control and govern with the greatest wisdom; in order
that, being accustomed by degrees to breathe the health-giving air of
liberty, minds which had been enervated or rather brutalised under
tyranny, might gradually acquire that severity of morals and spirit
of fortitude which made it at length the people of all most worthy of
respect. I should, then, have sought out for my country some peaceful
and happy Republic, of an antiquity that lost itself, as it were, in
the night of time: which had experienced only such shocks as served to
manifest and strengthen the courage and patriotism of its subjects; and
whose citizens, long accustomed to a wise independence, were not only
free, but worthy to be so.

I should have wished to choose myself a country, diverted, by a
fortunate impotence, from the brutal love of conquest, and secured, by
a still more fortunate situation, from the fear of becoming itself the
conquest of other States: a free city situated between several nations,
none of which should have any interest in attacking it, while each
had an interest in preventing it from being attacked by the others;
in short, a Republic which should have nothing to tempt the ambition
of its neighbours, but might reasonably depend on their assistance in
case of need. It follows that a republican State so happily situated
could have nothing to fear but from itself; and that, if its members
trained themselves to the use of arms, it would be rather to keep alive
that military ardour and courageous spirit which are so proper among
free-men, and tend to keep up their taste for liberty, than from the
necessity of providing for their defence.

I should have sought a country, in which the right of legislation
was vested in all the citizens; for who can judge better than they of
the conditions under which they had best dwell together in the same
society? Not that I should have approved of Plebiscita, like those
among the Romans; in which the rulers in the State, and those most
interested in its preservation, were excluded from the deliberations on
which in many cases its security depended; and in which, by the most
absurd inconsistency, the magistrates were deprived of rights which the
meanest citizens enjoyed.

On the contrary, I should have desired that, in order to prevent
self-interested and ill-conceived projects, and all such dangerous
innovations as finally ruined the Athenians, each man should not be at
liberty to propose new laws at pleasure; but that this right should
belong exclusively to the magistrates; and that even they should use it
with so much caution, the people, on its side, be so reserved in giving
its consent to such laws, and the promulgation of them be attended
with so much solemnity, that before the constitution could be upset by
them, there might be time enough for all to be convinced, that it is
above all the great antiquity of the laws which makes them sacred and
venerable, that men soon learn to despise laws which they see daily
altered, and that States, by accustoming themselves to neglect their
ancient customs under the pretext of improvement, often introduce
greater evils than those they endeavour to remove.

I should have particularly avoided, as necessarily ill-governed, a
Republic in which the people, imagining themselves in a position
to do without magistrates, or at least to leave them with only a
precarious authority, should imprudently have kept for themselves the
administration of civil affairs and the execution of their own laws.
Such must have been the rude constitution of primitive governments,
directly emerging from a state of nature; and this was another of the
vices that contributed to the downfall of the Republic of Athens.

But I should have chosen a community in which the individuals,
content with sanctioning their laws, and deciding the most important
public affairs in general assembly and on the motion of the rulers,
had established honoured tribunals, carefully distinguished the
several departments, and elected year by year some of the most
capable and upright of their fellow-citizens to administer justice
and govern the State; a community, in short, in which the virtue of
the magistrates thus bearing witness to the wisdom of the people,
each class reciprocally did the other honour. If in such a case any
fatal misunderstandings arose to disturb the public peace, even these
intervals of blindness and error would bear the marks of moderation,
mutual esteem, and a common respect for the laws; which are sure signs
and pledges of a reconciliation as lasting as sincere. Such are the
advantages, most honourable, magnificent and sovereign lords, which I
should have sought in the country in which I should have chosen to be
born. And if providence had added to all these a delightful situation,
a temperate climate, a fertile soil, and the most beautiful countryside
under Heaven, I should have desired only, to complete my felicity, the
peaceful enjoyment of all these blessings, in the bosom of this happy
country; to live at peace in the sweet society of my fellow-citizens,
and practising towards them, from their own example, the duties of
friendship, humanity, and every other virtue, to leave behind me the
honourable memory of a good man, and an upright and virtuous patriot.

But, if less fortunate or too late grown wise, I had seen myself
reduced to end an infirm and languishing life in other climates, vainly
regretting that peaceful repose which I had forfeited in the imprudence
of youth, I should at least have entertained the same feelings in my
heart, though denied the opportunity of making use of them in my native
country. Filled with a tender and disinterested love for my distant
fellow-citizens, I should have addressed them from my heart, much in
the following terms.

"My dear fellow-citizens, or rather my brothers, since the ties of
blood, as well as the laws, unite almost all of us, it gives me
pleasure that I cannot think of you, without thinking, at the same
time, of all the blessings you enjoy, and of which none of you,
perhaps, more deeply feels the value than I who have lost them. The
more I reflect on your civil and political condition, the less can I
conceive that the nature of human affairs could admit of a better.
In all other governments, when there is a question of ensuring the
greatest good of the State, nothing gets beyond projects and ideas, or
at best bare possibilities. But as for you, your happiness is complete,
and you have nothing to do but enjoy it; you require nothing more to be
made perfectly happy, than to know how to be satisfied with being so.
Your sovereignty, acquired or recovered by the sword, and maintained
for two centuries past by your valour and wisdom, is at length fully
and universally acknowledged. Your boundaries are fixed, your rights
confirmed and your repose secured by honourable treaties. Your
constitution is excellent, being not only dictated by the profoundest
wisdom, but guaranteed by great and friendly powers. Your State enjoys
perfect tranquillity; you have neither wars nor conquerors to fear; you
have no other master than the wise laws you have yourselves made; and
these are administered by upright magistrates of your own choosing. You
are neither so wealthy as to be enervated by effeminacy, and thence
to lose, in the pursuit of frivolous pleasures, the taste for real
happiness and solid virtue; nor poor enough to require more assistance
from abroad than your own industry is sufficient to procure you. In the
meantime the precious privilege of liberty, which in great nations is
maintained only by submission to the most exorbitant impositions, costs
you hardly anything for its preservation.

May a Republic, so wisely and happily constituted, last for ever, for
an example to other nations, and for the felicity of its own citizens!
This is the only prayer you have left to make, the only precaution
that remains to be taken. It depends, for the future, on yourselves
alone (not to make you happy, for your ancestors have saved you that
trouble), but to render that happiness lasting, by your wisdom in
its enjoyment. It is on your constant union, your obedience to the
laws, and your respect for their ministers, that your preservation
depends. If there remains among you the smallest trace of bitterness
or distrust, hasten to destroy it, as an accursed leaven which sooner
or later must bring misfortune and ruin on the State. I conjure you
all to look into your hearts, and to hearken to the secret voice
of conscience. Is there any among you who can find, throughout the
universe, a more upright, more enlightened and more honourable body
than your magistracy? Do not all its members set you an example of
moderation, of simplicity of manners, of respect for the laws, and of
the most sincere harmony? Place, therefore, without reserve, in such
wise superiors, that salutary confidence which reason ever owes to
virtue. Consider that they are your own choice, that they justify that
choice, and that the honours due to those whom you have dignified are
necessarily yours by reflexion. Not one of you is so ignorant as not to
know that, when the laws lose their force and those who defend them
their authority, security and liberty are universally impossible. Why,
therefore, should you hesitate to do that cheerfully and with just
confidence which you would all along have been bound to do by your true
interest, your duty and reason itself?

Let not a culpable and pernicious indifference to the maintenance
of the constitution ever induce you to neglect, in case of need,
the prudent advice of the most enlightened and zealous of your
fellow-citizens; but let equity, moderation and firmness of resolution
continue to regulate all your proceedings, and to exhibit you to the
whole universe as the example of a valiant and modest people, jealous
equally of their honour and of their liberty. Beware particularly, as
the last piece of advice I shall give you, of sinister constructions
and venomous rumours, the secret motives of which are often more
dangerous than the actions at which they are levelled. A whole house
will be awake and take the first alarm given by a good and trusty
watch-dog, who barks only at the approach of thieves; but we hate the
importunity of those noisy curs, which are perpetually disturbing the
public repose, and whose continual ill-timed warnings prevent our
attending to them, when they may perhaps be necessary."

And you, most honourable and magnificent lords, the worthy and revered
magistrates of a free people, permit me to offer you in particular
my duty and homage. If there is in the world a station capable of
conferring honour on those who fill it, it is undoubtedly that
which virtue and talents combine to bestow, that of which you have
made yourselves worthy, and to which you have been promoted by your
fellow-citizens. Their worth adds a new lustre to your own; while, as
you have been chosen, by men capable of governing others, to govern
themselves, I cannot but hold you as much superior to all other
magistrates, as a free people, and particularly that over which you
have the honour to preside, is by its wisdom and its reason superior to
the populace of other States.

Be it permitted me to cite an example of which there ought to have
existed better records, and one which will be ever near to my heart.
I cannot recall to mind, without the sweetest emotions, the memory of
that virtuous citizen, to whom I owe my being, and by whom I was often
instructed, in my infancy, in the respect which is due to you. I see
him still, living by the work of his hands, and feeding his soul on the
sublimest truths. I see the works of Tacitus, Plutarch and Grotius,
lying before him in the midst of the tools of his trade. At his side
stands his dear son, receiving, alas with too little profit, the tender
instructions of the best of fathers. But, if the follies of youth made
me for a while forget his wise lessons, I have at length the happiness
to be conscious that, whatever propensity one may have to vice, it is
not easy for an education, with which love has mingled, to be entirely
thrown away.

Such, my most honourable and magnificent lords, are the citizens, and
even the common inhabitants of the State which you govern; such are
those intelligent and sensible men, of whom, under the name of workmen
and the people, it is usual, in other nations, to have a low and false
opinion. My father, I own with pleasure, was in no way distinguished
among his fellow-citizens. He was only such as they all are; and yet,
such as he was, there is no country, in which his acquaintance would
not have been coveted, and cultivated even with advantage by men of the
highest character. It would not become me, nor is it, thank Heaven, at
all necessary for me to remind you of the regard which such men have a
right to expect of their magistrates, to whom they are equal both by
education and by the rights of nature and birth, and inferior only, by
their own will, by that preference which they owe to your merit, and,
for giving you, can claim some sort of acknowledgment on your side. It
is with a lively satisfaction I understand that the greatest candour
and condescension attend, in all your behaviour towards them, on that
gravity which becomes the ministers of the law; and that you so well
repay them, by your esteem and attention, the respect and obedience
which they owe to you. This conduct is not only just but prudent; as it
happily tends to obliterate the memory of many unhappy events, which
ought to be buried in eternal oblivion. It is also so much the more
judicious, as it tends to make this generous and equitable people find
a pleasure in their duty; to make them naturally love to do you honour,
and to cause those who are the most zealous in the maintenance of their
own rights to be at the same time the most disposed to respect yours.

It ought not to be thought surprising that the rulers of a civil
society should have the welfare and glory of their communities at
heart: but it is uncommonly fortunate for the peace of men, when those
persons who look upon themselves as the magistrates, or rather the
masters of a more holy and sublime country, show some love for the
earthly country which maintains them. I am happy in having it in my
power to make so singular an exception in our favour, and to be able to
rank, among its best citizens, those zealous depositaries of the sacred
articles of faith established by the laws, those venerable shepherds of
souls whose powerful and captivating eloquence are so much the better
calculated to bear to men's hearts the maxims of the gospel, as they
are themselves the first to put them into practice. All the world knows
of the great success with which the art of the pulpit is cultivated at
Geneva; but men are so used to hearing divines preach one thing and
practise another, that few have a chance of knowing how far the spirit
of Christianity, holiness of manners, severity towards themselves and
indulgence towards their neighbours, prevail throughout the whole body
of our ministers. It is, perhaps, given to the city of Geneva alone,
to produce the edifying example of so perfect a union between its
clergy and men of letters. It is in great measure on their wisdom,
their known moderation, and their zeal for the prosperity of the State
that I build my hopes of its perpetual tranquillity. At the same time,
I notice, with a pleasure mingled with surprise and veneration, how
much they detest the frightful maxims of those accursed and barbarous
men, of whom history furnishes us with more than one example; who, in
order to support the pretended rights of God, that is to say their own
interests, have been so much the less greedy of human blood, as they
were more hopeful their own in particular would be always respected.

I must not forget that precious half of the Republic, which makes the
happiness of the other; and whose sweetness and prudence preserve its
tranquillity and virtue. Amiable and virtuous daughters of Geneva,
it will be always the lot of your sex to govern ours. Happy are we,
so long as your chaste influence, solely exercised within the limits
of conjugal union, is exerted only for the glory of the State and
the happiness of the public. It was thus the female sex commanded at
Sparta; and thus you deserve to command at Geneva. What man can be such
a barbarian as to resist the voice of honour and reason, coming from
the lips of an affectionate wife? Who would not despise; the vanities
of luxury, on beholding the simple and modest attire which, from the
lustre it derives from you, seems the most favourable to beauty? It
is your task to perpetuate, by your insinuating influence and your
innocent and amiable rule, a respect for the laws of the State, and
harmony among the citizens. It is yours to reunite divided families by
happy marriages; and, above all things, to correct, by the persuasive
sweetness of your lessons and the modest graces of your conversation,
those extravagancies which our young people pick up in other countries,
whence, instead of many useful things by which they might profit, they
bring home hardly anything, besides a puerile air and a ridiculous
manner, acquired among loose women, but an admiration for I know not
what so-called grandeur, and paltry recompenses for being slaves, which
can never come near the real greatness of liberty. Continue, therefore,
always to be what you are, the chaste guardians of our morals, and the
sweet security for our peace, exerting on every occasion the privileges
of the heart and of nature, in the interests of duty and virtue.

I flatter myself that I shall never be proved to have been mistaken, in
building on such a foundation my hopes of the general happiness of the
citizens and the glory of the Republic. It must be confessed, however,
that with all these advantages, it will not shine with that lustre, by
which the eyes of most men are dazzled; a puerile and fatal taste for
which is the most mortal enemy of happiness and liberty.

Let our dissolute youth seek elsewhere light pleasures and long
repentances. Let our pretenders to taste admire elsewhere the
grandeur of palaces, the beauty of equipages, sumptuous furniture,
the pomp of public entertainments, and all the refinements of luxury
and effeminacy. Geneva boasts nothing but men; such a sight has
nevertheless a value of its own, and those who have a taste for it are
well worth the admirers of all the rest.

Deign, most honourable, magnificent and sovereign lords, to receive,
and with equal goodness, this respectful testimony of the interest I
take in your common prosperity. And, if I have been so unhappy as to
be guilty of any indiscreet transport in this glowing effusion of my
heart, I beseech you to pardon me, and to attribute it to the tender
affection of a true patriot, and to the ardent and legitimate zeal of
a man, who can imagine for himself no greater felicity than to see you
happy.

Most honourable, magnificent and sovereign lords, I am, with the most
profound respect,

Your most humble and obedient servant and fellow-citizen.


                                        J. J. ROUSSEAU.
_Chambéry,_
_June 12, 1754._





PREFACE


Of all human sciences the most useful and most imperfect appears
to me to be that of mankind: and I will venture to say, the single
inscription on the Temple of Delphi contained a precept more difficult
and more important than is to be found in all the huge volumes that
moralists have ever written. I consider the subject of the following
discourse as one of the most interesting questions philosophy
can propose, and unhappily for us, one of, the most thorny that
philosophers can have to solve. For how shall we know the source of
inequality between men, if we do not begin by knowing mankind? And
how shall man hope to see himself as nature made him, across all the
changes which the succession of place and time must have produced in
his original constitution? How can he distinguish what is fundamental
in his nature from the changes and additions which his circumstances
and the advances he has made have introduced to modify his primitive
condition? Like the statue of Glaucus, which was so disfigured by time,
seas and tempests, that it looked more like a wild beast than a god,
the human soul, altered in society by a thousand causes perpetually
recurring, by the acquisition of a multitude of truths and errors,
by the changes happening to the constitution of the body, and by
the continual jarring of the passions, has, so to speak, changed in
appearance, so as to be hardly recognisable. Instead of a being,
acting constantly from fixed and invariable principles, instead of
that celestial and majestic simplicity, impressed on it by its divine
Author, we find in it only the frightful contrast of passion mistaking
itself for reason, and of understanding grown delirious.

It is still more cruel that, as every advance made by the human species
removes it still farther from its primitive state, the more discoveries
we make, the more we deprive ourselves of the means of making the most
important of all. Thus it is, in one sense, by our very study of man,
that the knowledge of him is put out of our power.

It is easy to perceive that it is in these successive changes in
the constitution of man that we must look for the origin of those
differences which now distinguish men, who, it is allowed, are as equal
among themselves as were the animals of every kind, before physical
causes had introduced those varieties which are now observable among
some of them.

It is, in fact, not to be conceived that these primary changes, however
they may have arisen, could have altered, all at once and in the same
manner, every individual of the species. It is natural to think that,
while the condition of some of them grew better or worse, and they
were acquiring various good or bad qualities not inherent in their
nature, there were others who continued a longer time in their original
condition. Such was doubtless the first source of the inequality of
mankind, which it is much easier to point out thus in general terms,
than to assign with precision to its actual causes.

Let not my readers therefore imagine that I flatter myself with having
seen what it appears to me so difficult to discover. I have here
entered upon certain arguments, and risked some conjectures, less in
the hope of solving the difficulty, than with a view to throwing some
light upon it, and reducing the question to its proper form. Others may
easily proceed farther on the same road, and yet no one find it very
easy to get to the end. For it is by no means a light undertaking to
distinguish properly between what is original and what is artificial
in the actual nature of man, or to form a true idea of a state which
no longer exists, perhaps never did exist, and probably never will
exist; and of which, it is, nevertheless, necessary to have true
ideas, in order to form a proper judgment of our present state. It
requires, indeed, more philosophy than can be imagined to enable any
one to determine exactly what precautions he ought to take, in order
to make solid observations on this subject; and it appears to me that
a good solution of the following problem would be not unworthy of the
Aristotles and Plinys of the present age. _What experiments would have
to be made, to discover the natural man? And how are those experiments
to be made in a state of society_?

So far am I from undertaking to solve this problem, that I think I have
sufficiently, considered the subject, to venture to declare beforehand
that our greatest philosophers would not be too good to direct such
experiments, and our most powerful sovereigns to make them. Such a
combination we have very little reason to expect, especially attended
with the perseverance, or rather succession of intelligence and
good-will necessary on both sides to success.

These investigations, which are so difficult to make, and have been
hitherto so little thought of, are, nevertheless, the only means that
remain of obviating a multitude of difficulties which deprive us of
the knowledge of the real foundations of human society. It is this
ignorance of the nature of man, which casts so much uncertainty and
obscurity on the true definition of natural right: for, the idea of
right, says Burlamaqui, and more particularly that of natural right,
are ideas manifestly relative to the nature of man. It is then from
this very nature itself, he goes on, from the constitution and state of
man, that we must deduce the first principles of this science.

We cannot see without surprise and disgust how little agreement there
is between the different authors who have treated this great subject.
Among the more important writers there are scarcely two of the same
mind about it. Not to speak of the ancient philosophers, who seem
to have done their best purposely to contradict one another on the
most fundamental principles, the Roman jurists subjected man and the
other animals indiscriminately to the same natural law, because they
considered, under that name, rather the law which nature imposes on
herself than that which she prescribes to others; or rather because
of the particular acceptation of the term law among those jurists;
who seem on this occasion to have understood nothing more by it than
the general relations established by nature between all animated
beings, for their common preservation. The moderns, understanding,
by the term law, merely a rule prescribed to a moral being, that is
to say intelligent, free and considered in his relations to other
beings, consequently confine the jurisdiction of natural law to man,
an the only animal endowed with reason. But, defining this law, each
after his own fashion, they have established it on such metaphysical
principles, that there are very few persons among us capable of
comprehending them, much less of discovering them for themselves. So
that the definitions of these learned men, all differing in everything
else, agree only in this, that it is impossible to comprehend the law
of nature, and consequently to obey it, without being a very subtle
casuist and a profound metaphysician. All which is as much as to say
that mankind must have employed, in the establishment of society, a
capacity which is acquired only with great difficulty, and by very few
persons, even in a state of society.

Knowing so little of nature, and agreeing so ill about the meaning
of the word _law_, it would be difficult for us to fix on a good
definition of natural law. Thus all the definitions we meet with in
books, setting: aside their defect in point of uniformity, have yet
another fault, in that they are derived from many kinds of knowledge,
which men do not possess naturally, and from advantages of which they
can have no idea until they have already departed from that state.
Modern writers begin by inquiring what rules it would be expedient
for men to agree on for their common interest, and then give the name
of natural law to a collection of these rules, without any other
proof than the good that would result from their being universally
practised. This is undoubtedly a simple way of making definitions, and
of explaining the nature of things by almost arbitrary conveniences.

But as long as we are ignorant of the natural man, it is in vain for us
to attempt to determine either the law originally prescribed to him, or
that which is best adapted to his constitution. All we can know with
any certainty respecting this law is that, if it is to be a law, not
only the wills of those it obliges must be sensible of their submission
to it; but also, to be natural, it must come directly from the voice of
nature.

Throwing aside, therefore, all those scientific books, which teach us
only to see men such as they have made themselves, and contemplating
the first and most simple operations of the human soul, I think I can
perceive in it two principles prior to reason, one of them deeply
interesting us in our own welfare and preservation, and the other
exciting a natural repugnance at seeing any other sensible being, and
particularly any of our own species, suffer pain or death. It is from
the agreement and combination which the understanding is in a position
to establish between these two principles, without its being necessary
to introduce that of sociability, that all the rules of natural right
appear to me to be derived--rules which our reason is afterwards
obliged to establish on other foundations, when by its successive
developments it has been led to suppress nature itself.

In proceeding thus, we shall not be obliged to make man a philosopher
before he is a man. His duties toward others are not dictated to him
only by the later lessons of wisdom and, so long as he does not resist
the internal impulse of compassion, he will never hurt any other man,
nor even any sentient being; except on those lawful occasions on which
his own preservation is concerned and he is obliged to give himself
the preference. By this method also we put an end to the time-honoured
disputes concerning the participation of animals in natural law: for it
is clear that, being destitute of intelligence and liberty, they cannot
recognise that law; as they partake, however, in some measure of our
nature, in consequence of the sensibility with which they are endowed,
they ought to partake of natural rights so that mankind is subjected
to a kind of obligation even toward the brutes. It appears, in fact,
that if I am bound to do no injury to my fellow-creatures, this is less
because they are rational than because they are sentient beings: and
this quality, being common both to men and beasts, ought to entitle the
latter at least to the privilege of not being wantonly ill-treated by
the former.

The very study of the original man, of his real wants, and the
fundamental principles of his duty, is besides the only proper method
we can adopt to obviate all the difficulties which the origin of moral
inequality presents, on the true foundations of the body politic, on
the reciprocal rights of its members, and on many other similar topics
equally important and obscure.

If we look at human society with a calm and disinterested eye, it
seems, at first, to show us only the violence of the powerful and
the oppression of the weak. The mind is shocked at the cruelty of
the one, or is induced to lament the blindness of the other; and as
nothing is less permanent in life than those external relations, which
are more frequently produced by accident than wisdom, and which are
called weakness or power, riches or poverty, all human institutions
seem at first glance to be founded merely on banks of shifting sand. It
is only by taking a closer look, and removing the dust and sand that
surround the edifice, that we perceive the immovable basis on which it
is raised, and learn to respect its foundations. Now, without a serious
study of man, his natural faculties and their successive development,
we shall never be able to make these necessary distinctions, or to
separate, in the actual constitution of things, that which is the
effect of the divine will, from the innovations attempted by human
art. The political and moral investigations, therefore, to which the
important question before us leads, are in every respect useful; while
the hypothetical history of governments affords a lesson equally
instructive to mankind.

In considering what we should have become, had we been left to
ourselves, we should learn to bless Him, whose gracious hand,
correcting our institutions, and giving them an immovable basis, has
prevented those disorders which would otherwise have arisen from them,
and caused our happiness to come from those very sources which seemed
likely to involve us in misery.


    _Quem te deus esse_
    _Jussit, et humanâ quâ parte locatus es in re,_
    _Disce._
                        Persius, Satire iii, 71.





A DISSERTATION

ON THE ORIGIN AND FOUNDATION OF THE INEQUALITY OF MANKIND


It is of man that I have to speak; and the question I am investigating
shows me that it is to men that I must address myself: for questions
of this sort are not asked by those who are afraid to honour truth. I
shall then confidently uphold the cause of humanity before the wise
men who invite me to do so, and shall not be dissatisfied if I acquit
myself in a manner worthy of my subject and of my judges.

I conceive that there are two kinds of inequality among the human
species; one, which I call natural or physical, because it is
established by nature, and consists in a difference of age, health,
bodily strength, and the qualities of the mind or of the soul: and
another, which may be called moral or political inequality, because
it depends on a kind of convention, and is established, or at least
authorised by the consent of men. This latter consists of the different
privileges, which some men enjoy to the prejudice of others; such as
that of being more rich, more honoured, more powerful or even in a
position to exact obedience.

It is useless to ask what is the source of natural inequality, because
that question is answered by the simple definition of the word. Again,
it is still more useless to inquire whether there is any essential
connection between the two inequalities; for this would be only asking,
in other words, whether those who command are necessarily better than
those who obey, and if strength of body or of mind, wisdom or virtue
are always found in particular individuals, in proportion to their
power or wealth: a question fit perhaps to be discussed by slaves in
the hearing of their masters, but highly unbecoming to reasonable and
free men in search of the truth.

The subject of the present discourse, therefore, is more precisely
this. To mark, in the progress of things, the moment at which right
took the place of violence and nature became subject to law, and to
explain by what sequence of miracles the strong came to submit to serve
the weak, and the people to purchase imaginary repose at the expense of
real felicity.

The philosophers, who have inquired into the foundations of society,
have all felt the necessity of going back to a state of nature; but not
one of them has got there. Some of them have not hesitated to ascribe
to man, in such a state, the idea of just and unjust, without troubling
themselves to show that he must be possessed of such an idea, or that
it could be of any use to him. Others have spoken of the natural right
of every man to keep what belongs to him, without explaining what
they meant by _belongs_. Others again, beginning by giving the strong
authority over the weak, proceeded directly to the birth of government,
without regard to the time that must have elapsed before the meaning
of the words authority and government could have existed among men.
Every one of them, in short, constantly dwelling on wants, avidity,
oppression, desires and pride, has transferred to the state of nature
ideas which were acquired in society; so that, in speaking of the
savage, they described the social man. It has not even entered into
the heads of most of our writers to doubt whether the state of nature
ever existed; but it is clear from the Holy Scriptures that the first
man, having received his understanding and commandments immediately
from God, was not himself in such a state; and that, if we give such
credit to the writings of Moses as every Christian philosopher ought
to give, we must deny that, even before the deluge, men were ever in
the pure state of nature; unless, indeed, they fell back into it from
some very extraordinary circumstance; a paradox which it would be very
embarrassing to defend, and quite impossible to prove.

Let us begin then by laying facts aside, as they do not affect the
question. The investigations we may enter into, in treating this
subject, must not be considered as historical truths, but only as
mere conditional and hypothetical reasonings, rather calculated to
explain the nature of things, than to ascertain their actual origin;
just like the hypotheses which our physicists daily form respecting
the formation of the world. Religion commands us to believe that, God
Himself having taken men out of a state of nature immediately after
the creation, they are unequal only because it is His will they should
be so: but it does not forbid us to form conjectures based solely on
the nature of man, and the beings around him, concerning what might
have become of the human race, if it had been left to itself. This
then is the question asked me, and that which I propose to discuss in
the following discourse. As my subject interests mankind in general,
I shall endeavour to make use of a style adapted to all nations, or
rather, forgetting time and place, to attend only to men to whom I am
speaking. I shall suppose myself in the Lyceum of Athens, repeating the
lessons of my masters, with Plato and Xenocrates for judges, and the
whole human race for audience.

O man, of whatever country you are, and whatever your opinions may be,
behold your history, such as I have thought to read it, not in books
written by your fellow-creatures, who are liars, but in nature, which
never lies. All that comes from her will be true; nor will you meet
with anything false, unless I have involuntarily put in something of my
own. The times of which I am going to speak are very remote: how much
are you changed from what you once were! It is so to speak, the life of
your species which I am going to write, after the qualities which you
have received, which your education and habits may have depraved, but
cannot have entirely destroyed. There is, I feel, an age at which the
individual man would wish to stop; you are about to inquire about the
age at which you would have liked your whole species to stand still.
Discontented with your present state, for reasons which threaten your
unfortunate descendants with still greater discontent, you will perhaps
wish it were in your power to go back; and this feeling should be a
panegyric on your first ancestors, a criticism of your contemporaries,
and a terror to the unfortunates who will come after you.




THE FIRST PART


Important as it may be, in order to judge rightly of the natural state
of man, to consider him from his origin, and to examine him, as it
were, in the embryo of his species; I shall not follow his organisation
through its successive developments, nor shall I stay to inquire what
his animal system must have been at the beginning, in order to become
at length what it actually is. I shall not ask whether his long nails
were at first, as Aristotle supposes, only crooked talons; whether
his whole body, like that of a bear, was not covered with hair; or
whether the fact that he walked upon all fours, with his looks directed
toward the earth, confined to a horizon of a few paces, did not at
once point out the nature and limits of his ideas. On this subject I
could form none but vague and almost imaginary conjectures. Comparative
anatomy has as yet made too little progress, and the observations of
naturalists are too uncertain, to afford an adequate basis for any
solid reasoning. So that, without having recourse to the supernatural
information given us on this head, or paying any regard to the changes
which must have taken place in the internal, as well as the external,
conformation of man, as he applied his limbs to new uses, and fed
himself on new kinds of food, I shall suppose his conformation to have
been at all times what it appears to us at this day; that he always
walked on two legs, made use of his hands as we do, directed his looks
over all nature, and measured with his eyes the vast expanse of Heaven.

If we strip this being, thus constituted, of all the supernatural gifts
he may have received, and all the artificial faculties he can have
acquired only by a long process; if we consider him, in a word, just as
he must have come from the hands of nature, we behold in him an animal
weaker than some, and less agile than others; but, taking him all
round, the most advantageously organised of any. I see him satisfying
his hunger at the first oak, and slaking his thirst at the first brook;
finding his bed at the foot of the tree which afforded him a repast;
and, with that, all his wants supplied.

While the earth was left to its natural fertility and covered with
immense forests, whose trees were never mutilated by the axe, it would
present on every side both sustenance and shelter for every species of
animal. Men dispersed up and down among the rest, would observe and
imitate their industry, and thus attain even to the instinct of the
beasts, with the advantage that, whereas every species of brutes was
confined to one particular instinct, man, who perhaps has not any one
peculiar to himself, would appropriate them all, and live upon most of
those different foods, which other animals shared among themselves; and
thus would find his subsistence much more easily than any of the rest.

Accustomed from their infancy to the inclemencies of the weather and
the rigour of the seasons, inured to fatigue, and forced, naked and
unarmed, to defend themselves and their prey from other ferocious
animals, or to escape them by flight, men would acquire a robust and
almost unalterable constitution. The children, bringing with them into
the world the excellent constitution of their parents, and fortifying
it by the very exercises which first produced it, would thus acquire
all the vigour of which the human frame is capable. Nature in this case
treats them exactly as Sparta treated the children of her citizens:
those who come well formed into the world she renders strong and
robust, and all the rest she destroys; differing in this respect from
our modern communities, in which the State, by making children a burden
to their parents, kills them indiscriminately before they are born.

The body of a savage man being the only instrument he understands, he
uses it for various purposes, of which ours, for want of practice, are
incapable: for our industry deprives us of that force and agility,
which necessity obliges him to acquire. If he had had an axe, would he
have been able with his naked arm to break so large a branch from a
tree? If he had had a sling, would he have been able to throw a stone
with so great velocity? If he had had a ladder, would he have been so
nimble in climbing a tree? If he had had a horse, would he have been
himself so swift of foot? Give civilised man time to gather all his
machines about him, and he will no doubt easily beat the savage; but if
you would see a still more unequal contest, set them together naked
and unarmed, and you will soon see the advantage of having all our
forces constantly at our disposal, of being always prepared for every
event, and of carrying one's self, as it were, perpetually whole and
entire about one.

Hobbes contends that man is naturally intrepid, and is intent only
upon attacking and fighting. Another illustrious philosopher holds
the opposite, and Cumberland and Puffendorf also affirm that nothing
is more timid and fearful than man in the state of nature; that he
is always in a tremble, and ready to fly at the least noise or the
slightest movement. This may be true of things he does not know; and I
do not doubt his being terrified by every novelty that presents itself,
when he neither knows the physical good or evil he may expect from it,
nor can make a comparison between his own strength and the dangers he
is about to encounter. Such circumstances, however, rarely occur in a
state of nature, in which all things proceed in a uniform manner, and
the face of the earth is not subject to those sudden and continual
changes which arise from the passions and caprices of bodies of men
living together. But savage man, living dispersed among other animals
and finding himself betimes in a situation to measure his strength
with theirs, soon comes to compare himself with them; and, perceiving
that he surpasses them more in adroitness than they surpass him in
strength, learns to be no longer afraid of them. Set a bear, or a wolf,
against a robust, agile, and resolute savage, as they all are, armed
with stones and a good cudgel, and you will see that the danger will
be at least on both sides, and that, after a few trials of this kind,
wild beasts, which are not fond of attacking each other, will not be at
all ready to attack man, whom they will have found to be as wild and
ferocious as themselves. With regard to such animals as have really
more strength than man has adroitness, he is in the same situation as
all weaker animals, which notwithstanding are still able to subsist;
except indeed that he has the advantage that, being equally swift of
foot, and finding an almost certain place of refuge in every tree, he
is at liberty to take or leave it at every encounter, and thus to fight
or fly, as he chooses. Add to this that it does not appear that any
animal naturally makes war on man, except in case of self-defence or
excessive hunger, or betrays any of those violent antipathies, which
seem to indicate that one species is intended by nature for the food of
another.

This is doubtless why negroes and savages are so little afraid of
the wild beasts they may meet in the woods. The Caraibs of Venezuela
among others live in this respect in absolute security and without the
smallest inconvenience. Though they are almost naked, Francis Correal
tells us, they expose themselves freely in the woods, armed only
with bows and arrows; but no one has ever heard of one of them being
devoured by wild beasts.

But man has other enemies more formidable, against which he is not
provided with such means of defence: these are the natural infirmities
of infancy, old age, and illness of every kind, melancholy proofs of
our weakness, of which the two first are common to all animals, and
the last belongs chiefly to man in a state of society. With regard to
infancy, it is observable that the mother, carrying her child always
with her, can nurse it with much greater ease than the females of many
other animals, which are forced to be perpetually going and coming,
with great fatigue, one way to find subsistence, and another to suckle
or feed their young. It is true that if the woman happens to perish,
the infant is in great danger of perishing with her; but this risk is
common to many other species of animals, whose young take a long time
before they are able to provide for themselves. And if our infancy is
longer than theirs, our lives are longer in proportion; so that all
things are in this respect fairly equal; though there are other rules
to be considered regarding the duration of the first period of life,
and the number of young, which do not affect the present subject. In
old age, when men are less active and perspire little, the need for
food diminishes with the ability to provide it. As the savage state
also protects them from gout and rheumatism, and old age is, of all
ills, that which human aid can least alleviate, they cease to be,
without others perceiving that they are no more, and almost without
perceiving it themselves.

With respect to sickness, I shall not repeat the vain and false
declamations which most healthy people pronounce against medicine;
but I shall ask if any solid observations have been made from which
it may be justly concluded that, in the countries where the art of
medicine is most neglected, the mean duration of man's life is less
than in those where it is most cultivated. How indeed can this be
the case, if we bring on ourselves more diseases than medicine can
furnish remedies? The great inequality in manner of living, the extreme
idleness of some, and the excessive labour of others, the easiness
of exciting and gratifying our sensual appetites, the too exquisite
foods of the wealthy which overheat and fill them with indigestion,
and, on the other hand, the unwholesome food of the poor, often, bad
as it is, insufficient for their needs, which induces them, when
opportunity offers, to eat voraciously and overcharge their stomachs;
all these, together with sitting up late, and excesses of every kind,
immoderate transports of every passion, fatigue, mental exhaustion, the
innumerable pains and anxieties inseparable from every condition of
life, by which the mind of man is incessantly tormented; these are too
fatal proofs that the greater part of our ills are of our own making,
and that we might have avoided them nearly all by adhering to that
simple, uniform and solitary manner of life which nature prescribed.
If she destined man to be healthy, I venture to declare that a state
of reflection is a state contrary to, nature, and that a thinking man
is a depraved animal. When we think of the good constitution of the
savages, at least of those whom we have not ruined with our spirituous
liquors, and reflect that they are troubled with hardly any disorders,
save wounds and old age, we are tempted to believe that, in following
the history of civil society, we shall be telling also that of human
sickness. Such, at least, was the opinion of Plato, who inferred from
certain remedies prescribed, or approved, by Podalirius and Machaon
at the siege of Troy, that several sicknesses which these remedies
gave rise to in his time, were not then known to mankind: and Celsus
tells us that diet, which is now so necessary, was first invented by
Hippocrates.

Being subject therefore to so few causes of sickness, man, in the state
of nature, can have no need of remedies, and still less of physicians:
nor is the human race in this respect worse off than other animals,
and it is easy to learn from hunters whether they meet with many infirm
animals in the course of the chase. It is certain they frequently meet
with such as carry the marks of having been considerably wounded, with
many that have had bones or even limbs broken, yet have been healed
without any Other surgical assistance than that of time, or any other
regimen than that of their ordinary life. At the same time their cures
seem not to have been less perfect, for their not having been tortured
by incisions, poisoned with drugs, or wasted by fasting. In short,
however useful medicine, properly administered, may be among us, it is
certain that, if the savage, when he is sick and left to himself, has
nothing to hope but from nature, he has, on the other hand, nothing to
fear but from his disease; which renders his situation often preferable
to our own.

We should beware, therefore, of confounding the savage man with the
men we have daily before our eyes. Nature treats all the animals left
to her care with a predilection that seems to show how jealous she
is of that right. The horse, the cat, the bull, and even the ass are
generally of greater stature, and always more robust, and have more
vigour, strength and courage, when they run wild in the forests than
when bred in the stall. By becoming domesticated, they lose half these
advantages; and it seems as if all our care to feed and treat them well
serves only to deprave them. It is thus with man also: as he becomes
sociable and a slave, he grows weak, timid and servile; his effeminate
way of life totally enervates his strength and courage. To this it may
be added that there is still a greater difference between savage and
civilised man, than between wild and tame beasts: for men and brutes
having been treated alike by nature, the several conveniences in which
men indulge themselves still more than they do their beasts, are so
many additional causes of their deeper degeneracy.

It is not therefore so great a misfortune to these primitive men, nor
so great an obstacle to their preservation, that they go naked, have no
dwellings and lack all the superfluities which we think so necessary.
If their skins are not covered with hair, they have no need of such
covering in warm climates; and, in cold countries, they soon learn
to appropriate the skins of the beasts they have overcome. If they
have but two legs to run with, they have two arms to defend themselves
with, and provide for their wants. Their children are slowly and with
difficulty taught to walk; but their mothers are able to carry them
with ease; advantage which other animals lack, as the mother, if
pursued, is forced either to abandon her young, or to regulate her
pace by theirs. Unless, in short, we suppose a singular and fortuitous
concurrence of circumstances of which I shall speak later, and
which would be unlikely to exist, it is plain in every state of the
case, that the man who first made himself clothes or a dwelling was
furnishing himself with things not at all necessary; for he had till
then done without them, and there is no reason why he should not have
been able to put up in manhood with the same kind of life as had been
his in infancy.

Solitary, indolent, and perpetually accompanied by danger, the savage
cannot but be fond of sleep; his sleep too must be light, like that of
the animals, which think but little and may be said to slumber all the
time they do not think. Self-preservation being his chief and almost
sole concern, he must exercise most those faculties which are most
concerned with attack or defence, either for overcoming his prey, or
for preventing him from becoming the prey of other animals. On the
other hand, those organs which are perfected only by softness and
sensuality will remain in a gross and imperfect state, incompatible
with any sort of delicacy; so that, his senses being divided on this
head, his touch and taste will be extremely coarse, his sight, hearing
and smell exceedingly fine and subtle. Such in general is the animal
condition, and such, according to the narratives of travellers, is that
of most savage nations. It is therefore no matter for surprise that
the Hottentots of the Cape of Good Hope distinguish ships at sea, with
the naked eye, at as great a distance as the Dutch can do with their
telescopes; or that the savages of America should trace the Spaniards,
by their smell, as well as the best dogs could have done; or that
these barbarous peoples feel no pain in going naked, or that they use
large quantities of piemento with their food, and drink the strongest
European liquors like water.

Hitherto I have considered merely the physical man; let us now take a
view of him on his metaphysical and moral side.

I see nothing in any animal but an ingenious machine, to which nature
hath given senses to wind itself up, and to guard itself, to a certain
degree, against anything that might tend to disorder or destroy it.
I perceive exactly the same things in the human machine, with this
difference, that in the operations of the brute, nature is the sole
agent, whereas man has some share in his own operations, in his
character as a free agent. The one chooses and refuses by instinct, the
other from an act of free-will: hence the brute cannot deviate from the
rule prescribed to it, even when it would be advantageous for it to do
so; and, on the contrary, man frequently deviates from such rules to
his own prejudice. Thus a pigeon would be starved to death by the side
of a dish of the choicest meats, and a cat on a heap of fruit or grain;
though it is certain that either might find nourishment in the foods
which it thus rejects with disdain, did it think of trying them. Hence
it is that dissolute men run into excesses which bring on fevers and
death; because the mind depraves the senses, and the will continues to
speak when nature is silent.

Every animal has ideas, since it has senses; it even combines those
ideas in a certain degree; and it is only in degree that man differs,
in this respect, from the brute. Some philosophers have even maintained
that there is a greater difference between one man and another than
between some men and some beasts. It is not, therefore, so much the
understanding that constitutes the specific difference between the man
and the brute, as the human quality of free-agency. Nature lays her
commands on every animal, and the brute obeys her voice. Man receives
the same impulsion, but at the same time knows himself at liberty
to acquiesce or resist: and it is particularly in his consciousness
of this liberty that the spirituality of his soul is displayed. For
physics may explain, in some measure, the mechanism of the senses
and the formation of ideas; but in the power of willing or rather of
choosing, and in the feeling of this power, nothing is to be found but
acts which are purely spiritual and wholly inexplicable by the laws of
mechanism.

However, even if the difficulties attending all these questions
should still leave room for difference in this respect between men and
brutes, there is another very specific quality which distinguishes
them, and which will admit of no dispute. This is the faculty of
self-improvement, which, by the help of circumstances, gradually
develops all the rest of our faculties, and is inherent in the species
as in the individual: whereas a brute is, at the end of a few months,
all he will ever be during his whole life, and his species, at the
end of a thousand years, exactly what it was the first year of that
thousand. Why is man alone liable to grow into a dotard? Is it not
because he returns, in this, to his primitive state; and that, while
the brute, which has acquired nothing and has therefore nothing to
lose, still retains the force of instinct, man, who loses, by age
or accident, all that his _perfectibility_ had enabled him to gain,
falls by this means lower than the brutes themselves? It would be
melancholy, were we forced to admit that this distinctive and almost
unlimited faculty is the source of all human misfortunes; that it is
this which, in time, draws man out of his original state, in which
he would have spent his days insensibly in peace and innocence; that
it is this faculty, which, successively producing in different ages
his discoveries and his errors, his vices and his virtues, makes him
at length a tyrant both over himself and over nature.[1] It would be
shocking to be obliged to regard as a benefactor the man who first
suggested to the Oroonoko Indians the use of the boards they apply to
the temples of their children, which secure to them some part at least
of their imbecility and original happiness.

Savage man, left by nature solely to the direction of instinct, or
rather indemnified for what he may lack by faculties capable at first
of supplying its place, and afterwards of raising him much above it,
must accordingly begin with purely animal functions: thus seeing and
feeling must be his first condition, which would be common to him and
all other animals. To will, and not to will, to desire and to fear,
must be the first, and almost the only operations of his soul, till new
circumstances occasion new developments of his faculties.

Whatever moralists may hold, the human understanding is greatly
indebted to the passions, which, it is universally allowed, are also
much indebted to the understanding. It is by the activity of the
passions that pur reason is improved; for we desire knowledge only
because we wish to enjoy; and it is impossible to conceive any reason
why a person who has neither fears nor desires should give himself the
trouble of reasoning. The passions, again, originate in our wants,
and their progress depends on that of our knowledge; for we cannot
desire or fear anything, except from the idea we have of it, or from
the simple impulse of nature. Now savage man, being destitute of every
species of intelligence, can have no passions save those of the latter
kind: his desires never go beyond his physical wants. The only goods
he recognises in the universe are food, a female, and sleep: the only
evils he fears are pain and hunger. I say pain, and not death: for
no animal can know what it is to die; the knowledge of death and its
terrors being one of the first acquisitions made by man in departing
from an animal state.

It would be easy, were it necessary, to support this opinion by facts,
and to show that, in all the nations of the world, the progress
of the understanding has been exactly proportionate to the wants
which the peoples had received from nature, or been subjected to by
circumstances, and in consequence to the passions that induced them to
provide for those necessities. I might instance the arts, rising up in
Egypt and expanding with the inundation of the Nile. I might follow
their progress into Greece, where they took root afresh, grew up and
towered to the skies, among the rocks and sands of Attica, without
being able to germinate on the fertile banks of the Eurotas: I might
observe that in general, the people of the North are more industrious
than those of the South, because they cannot get on so well without
being so: as if nature wanted to equalise matters by giving their
understandings the fertility she had refused to their soil.

But who does not see, without recurring to the uncertain testimony
of history, that everything seems to remove from savage man both the
temptation and the means of changing his condition? His imagination
paints no pictures; his heart makes no demands on him. His few wants
are so readily supplied, and he is so far from having the knowledge
which is needful to make him want more, that he can have neither
foresight nor curiosity. The face of nature becomes indifferent to
him as it grows familiar. He sees in it always the same order, the
same successions: he has not understanding enough to wonder at the
greatest miracles; nor is it in his mind that we can expect to find
that philosophy man needs, if he is to know how to notice for once what
he sees every day. His soul, which nothing disturbs, is wholly wrapped
up in the feeling of its present existence, without any idea of the
future, however near at hand; while his projects, as limited as his
views, hardly extend to the close of day. Such, even at present, is the
extent of the native Caribean's foresight: he will improvidently sell
you his cotton-bed in the morning, and come crying in the evening to
buy it again, not having foreseen he would want it again the next night.

The more we reflect on this subject, the greater appears the distance
between pure sensation and the most simple knowledge: it is impossible
indeed to conceive how a man, by his own powers alone, without the aid
of communication and the spur of necessity, could have bridged so great
a gap. How many ages may have elapsed before mankind were in a position
to behold any other Are than that of the heavens. What a multiplicity
of chances must have happened to teach them the commonest uses of that
element! How often must they have let it out before they acquired the
art of reproducing it? and how often may not such a secret have died
with him who had discovered it? What shall we say of agriculture, an
art which requires so much labour and foresight, which is so dependent
on others that it is plain it could only be practised in a society
which had at least begun, and which does not serve so much to draw
the means of subsistence from the earth--for these it would produce
of itself--but to compel it to produce what is most to our taste? But
let us suppose that men had so multiplied that the natural produce of
the earth was no longer sufficient for their support; a supposition,
by the way, which would prove such a life to be very advantageous for
the human race; let us suppose that, without forges or workshops, the
instruments of husbandry had dropped from the sky into the hands of
savages; that they had overcome their natural aversion to continual
labour; that they had learnt so much foresight for their needs; that
they had divined how to cultivate the earth, to sow grain and plant
trees; that they had discovered the arts of grinding corn, and of
setting the grape to ferment--all being things that must have been
taught them by the gods, since it is not to be conceived how they
could discover them for themselves--yet after all this, what man among
them would be so absurd as to take the trouble of cultivating a field,
which might be stripped of its crop by the first comer, man or beast,
that might take a liking to it; and how should each of them resolve to
pass his life in wearisome labour, when, the more necessary to him the
reward of his labour might be, the surer he would be of not getting
it? In a word, how could such a situation induce men to cultivate the
earth, till it was regularly parcelled out among them; that is to say,
till the state of nature had been abolished?

Were we to suppose savage man as trained in the art of thinking as
philosophers make him; were we, like them, to suppose him a very
philosopher capable of investigating the sublimest truths, and of
forming, by highly abstract chains of reasoning, maxims of reason and
justice, deduced from the love of order in general, or the known will
of his Creator; in a word, were we to suppose him as intelligent and
enlightened, as he must have been, and is in fact found to have been,
dull and stupid, what advantage Would accrue to the species, from all
such metaphysics, which could not be communicated by one to another,
but must end with him who made them? What progress could be made by
mankind, while dispersed in the woods among other animals? and how far
could men improve or mutually enlighten one another, when, having no
fixed habitation, and no need of one another's assistance, the same
persons hardly met twice in their lives, and perhaps then, without
knowing one another or speaking together?

Let it be considered how many ideas we owe to the use of speech; how
far grammar exercises the understanding and facilitates its operations.
Let us reflect on the inconceivable pains and the infinite space of
time that the first invention of languages must have cost. To these
reflections add what preceded, and then judge how many thousand ages
must have elapsed in the successive development in the human mind of
those operations of which it is capable.

I shall here take the liberty for a moment, of considering the
difficulties of the origin of languages, on which subject I might
content myself with a simple repetition of the Abbé Condillac's
investigations, as they fully confirm my system, and perhaps even
first suggested it. But it is plain, from the manner in which this
philosopher solves the difficulties he himself raises, concerning the
origin of arbitrary signs, that he assumes what I question, viz. that
a kind of society, must already have existed among the first inventors
of language. While I refer, therefore, to his observations on this
head, I think it right to give my own, in order to exhibit the same
difficulties in a light adapted to my subject. The first which presents
itself is to conceive how language can have become necessary; for
as there was no communication among men and no need for any, we can
neither conceive the necessity of this invention, nor the possibility
of it, if it was not somehow indispensable. I might affirm, with many
others, that languages arose in the domestic intercourse between
parents and their children. But this expedient would not obviate the
difficulty, and would besides involve the blunder made by those who, in
reasoning on the state of nature, always import into it ideas gathered
in a state of society. Thus they constantly consider families as living
together under one roof, and the individuals of each as observing among
themselves a union as intimate and permanent as that which exists
among us, where so many common interests unite them: whereas, in this
primitive state, men had neither houses, nor huts, nor any kind of
property whatever; every one lived where he could, seldom for more
than a single night; the sexes united without design, as accident,
opportunity or inclination brought them together, nor had they any
great need of words to communicate their designs to each other; and
they parted with the same indifference. The mother gave suck to her
children at first for her own sake; and afterwards, when habit had
made them dear, for theirs: but as soon as they were strong enough to
go in search of their own food, they forsook her of their own accord;
and, as they had hardly any other method of not losing one another
than that of remaining continually within sight, they soon became quite
incapable of recognising one another when they happened to meet again.
It is farther to be observed that the child, having all his wants to
explain, and of course more to say to his mother than the mother could
have to say to him, must have borne the brunt of the task of invention,
and the language he used would be of his own device, so that the number
of languages would be equal to that of the individuals speaking them,
and the variety would be increased by the vagabond and roving life they
led, which would not give time for any idiom to become constant. For to
say that the mother dictated to her child the words he was to use in
asking her for one thing or another, is an explanation of how languages
already formed are taught, but by no means explains how languages were
originally formed.

We will suppose, however, that this first difficulty is obviated. Let
us for a moment then take ourselves as being on this side of the vast
space which must lie between a pure state of nature and that in which
languages had become necessary, and, admitting their necessity, let
us inquire how they could first be established. Here we have a new
and worse difficulty to grapple with; for if men need speech to learn
to think, they must have stood in much greater need of the art of
thinking, to be able to invent that of speaking. And though we might
conceive how the articulate sounds of the voice came to be taken as
the conventional interpreters of our ideas, it would still remain for
us to inquire what could have been the interpreters of this convention
for those ideas, which, answering to no sensible objects, could not be
indicated either by gesture or voice; so that we can hardly form any
tolerable conjectures about the origin of this art of communicating our
thoughts and establishing a correspondence between minds: an art so
sublime, that far distant as it is from its origin, philosophers still
behold it at such an immeasurable distance from perfection, that there
is none rash enough to affirm it will ever reach it, even though the
revolutions time necessarily produces were suspended in its favour,
though prejudice should be banished from our academies or condemned
to silence, and those learned societies should devote themselves
uninterruptedly for whole ages to this thorny question.

The first language of mankind, the most universal and vivid, in a
word the only language man needed, before he had occasion to exert
his eloquence to persuade assembled multitudes, was the simple cry of
nature. But as this was excited only by a sort of instinct on urgent
occasions, to implore assistance in case of danger, or relief in case
of suffering, it could be of little use in the ordinary course of life,
in which more moderate feelings prevail. When the ideas of men began to
expand and multiply, and closer communication took place among them,
they strove to invent more numerous signs and a more copious language.
They multiplied the inflections of the voice, and added gestures,
which are in their own nature more expressive, and depend less for
their meaning on a prior determination. Visible and movable objects
were therefore expressed by gestures, and audible ones by imitative
sounds: but, as hardly anything can be indicated by gestures, except
objects actually present or easily described, and visible actions; as
they are not universally useful--for darkness or the interposition
of a material object destroys their efficacy--and as besides they
rather request than secure our attention; men at length bethought
themselves of substituting for them the articulate sounds of the voice,
which, without bearing the same relation to any particular ideas, are
better calculated to express them all, as conventional signs. Such an
institution could only be made by common consent, and must have been
effected in a manner not very easy for men whose gross organs had not
been accustomed to any such exercise. It is also in itself still more
difficult to conceive, since such a common agreement must have had
motives, and speech seems to have been highly necessary to establish
the use of it.

It is reasonable to suppose that the words first made use of by mankind
had a much more extensive signification than those used in languages
already formed, and that ignorant as they were of the division of
discourse into its constituent parts, they at first gave every single
word the sense of a whole proposition. When they began to distinguish
subject and attribute, and noun and verb, which was itself no common
effort of genius, substantives were at first only so many proper
names; the present infinitive was the only tense of verbs; and the very
idea of adjectives must have been developed with great difficulty; for
every adjective is an abstract idea, and abstractions are painful and
unnatural operations.

Every object at first received a particular name without regard to
genus or species, which these primitive originators were not in a
position to distinguish; every individual presented itself to their
minds in isolation, as they are in the picture of nature. If one oak
was called A, another was called B; for the primitive idea of two
things is that they are not the same, and it often takes a long time
for what they have in common to be seen: so that, the narrower the
limits of their knowledge of things, the more copious their dictionary
must have been. The difficulty of using such a vocabulary could not
be easily removed; for, to arrange beings under common and generic
denominations, it became necessary to know their distinguishing
properties: the need arose for observation and definition, that is to
say, for natural history and metaphysics of a far more developed kind
than men can at that time have possessed.

Add to this, that general ideas cannot be introduced into the mind
without the assistance of words, nor can the understanding seize
them except by means of propositions. This is one of the reasons why
animals cannot form such ideas, or ever acquire that capacity for
self-improvement which depends on them. When a monkey goes from one nut
to another, are we to conceive that he entertains any general idea of
that kind of fruit, and compares its archetype with the two individual
nuts? Assuredly he does not; but the sight of one of these nuts recalls
to his memory the sensations which he received from the other, and his
eyes, being modified after a certain manner, give information to the
palate of the modification it is about to receive. Every general idea
is purely intellectual; if the imagination meddles with it ever so
little, the idea immediately becomes particular. If you endeavour to
trace in your mind the image of a tree in general, you never attain to
your end. In spite of all you can do, you will have to see it as great
or little, bare or leafy, light or dark, and were you capable of seeing
nothing in it but what is common to all trees, it would no longer be
like a tree at all. Purely abstract beings are perceivable in the same
manner, or are only conceivable by the help of language. The definition
of a triangle alone gives you a true idea of it: the moment you imagine
a triangle in your mind, it is some particular triangle and not
another, and you cannot avoid giving it sensible lines and a coloured
area. We must then make use of propositions and of language in order to
form general ideas. For no sooner does the imagination cease to operate
than the understanding proceeds only by the help of words. If then the
first inventors of speech could give names only to ideas they already
had, it follows that the first substantives could be nothing more than
proper names.

But when our new grammarians, by means of which I have no conception,
began to extend their ideas and generalise their terms, the ignorance
of the inventors must have confined this method within very narrow
limits; and, as they had at first gone too far in multiplying the names
of individuals, from ignorance of their genus and species, they made
afterwards too few of these, from not having considered beings in all
their specific differences. It would indeed have needed more knowledge
and experience than they could have, and more pains and inquiry than
they would have bestowed, to carry these distinctions to their proper
length. If, even to-day, we are continually discovering new species,
which have hitherto escaped observation, let us reflect how many of
them must have escaped men who judged things merely from their first
appearance! It is superfluous to add that the primitive classes and
the most general notions must necessarily have escaped their notice
also. How, for instance, could they have understood or thought of the
words matter, spirit, substance, mode, figure, motion, when even our
philosophers, who have so long been making use of them, have themselves
the greatest difficulty in understanding them; and when, the ideas
attached to them being purely metaphysical, there are no models of them
to be found in nature?

But I stop at this point, and ask my judges to suspend their reading
a while, to consider, after the invention of physical substantives,
which is the easiest part of language to invent, that there is still a
great way to go, before the thoughts of men will have found perfect
expression and constant form, such as would answer the purposes of
public speaking, and produce their effect on society. I beg of them to
consider how much time must have been spent, and how much knowledge
needed, to find out numbers, abstract terms, aorists and all the tenses
of verbs, particles, syntax, the method of connecting propositions,
the forms of reasoning, and all the logic of speech. For myself, I am
so aghast at the increasing difficulties which present themselves,
and so well convinced of the almost demonstrable impossibility that
languages should owe their original institution to merely human means,
that I leave, to any one who will undertake it, the discussion of
the difficult problem, which was most necessary, the existence of
society to the invention of language, or the invention of language
to the establishment of society. But be the origin of language and
society what they may, it may be at least inferred, from the little
care which nature has taken to unite mankind by mutual wants, and to
facilitate the use of speech, that she has contributed little to make
them sociable, and has put little of her own into all they have done
to create such bonds of union. It is in fact impossible to conceive
why, in a state of nature, one man should stand more in need of the
assistance of another, than a monkey or a wolf of the assistance of
another of its kind: or, granting that he did, what motives could
induce that other to assist him; or, even then, by what means they
could agree about the conditions. I know it is incessantly repeated
that man would in such a state have been the most miserable of
creatures; and indeed, if it be true, as I think I have proved, that
he must have lived many ages, before he could have either desire or
an opportunity of emerging from it, this would only be an accusation
against nature, and not against the being which she had thus unhappily
constituted. But as I understand the word _miserable_, it either has
no meaning at all, or else signifies only a painful privation of
something, or a state of suffering either in body or soul. I should be
glad to have explained to me, what kind of misery a free being, whose
heart is at ease and whose body is in health, can possibly suffer. I
would ask also, whether a social or a natural life is most likely to
become insupportable to those who enjoy it. We see around us hardly a
creature in civil society, who does not lament his existence: we even
see many deprive themselves of as much of it as they can, and laws
human and divine together can hardly put a stop to the disorder. I
ask, if it was ever known that a savage took it into his head, when
at liberty, to complain of life or to make away with himself. Let us
therefore judge, with less vanity, on which side the real misery is
found. On the other hand, nothing could be more unhappy than savage
man, dazzled by science, tormented by his passions, and reasoning about
a state different from his own. It appears that Providence most wisely
determined that the faculties, which he potentially possessed, should
develop themselves only as occasion offered to exercise them, in order
that they might not be superfluous or perplexing to him, by appearing
before their time, nor slow and useless when the need for them arose.
In instinct alone, he had all he required for living in the state of
nature; and with a developed understanding he has only just enough to
support life in society.

It appears, at first view, that men in a state of nature, having no
moral relations or determinate obligations one with another, could
not be either good nor bad, virtuous or vicious; unless we take these
terms in a physical sense, and call, in an individual, those qualities
vices which may be injurious to his preservation, and those virtues
which contribute to it; in which case, he would have to be accounted
most virtuous, who put least check on the pure impulses of nature.
But without deviating from the ordinary sense of the words, it will
be proper to suspend the judgment we might be led to form on such a
state, and be on our guard against our prejudices, till we have weighed
the matter in the scales of impartiality, and seen whether virtues
or vices preponderate among civilised men; and whether their virtues
do them more good than their vices do harm; till we have discovered,
whether the progress of the sciences sufficiently indemnifies them for
the mischiefs they do one another, in proportion as they are better
informed of the good they ought to do; or whether they would not be,
on the whole, in a much happier condition if they had nothing to fear
or to hope from any one, than as they are, subjected to universal
dependence, and obliged to take everything from those who engage to
give them nothing in return.

Above all, let us not conclude, with Hobbes, that because man has no
idea of goodness, he must be naturally wicked; that he is vicious
because he does not know virtue; that he always refuses to do his
fellow-creatures services which he does not think they have a
right to demand; or that by virtue of the right he truly claims to
everything he needs, he foolishly imagines himself the sole proprietor
of the whole universe. Hobbes had seen clearly the defects of all
the modern definitions of natural right: but the consequences which
he deduces from his own show that he understands it in an equally
false sense. In reasoning on the principles he lays down, he ought
to have said that the state of nature, being that in which the care
for our own preservation is the least prejudicial to that of others,
was consequently the best calculated to promote peace, and the most
suitable for mankind. He does say the exact opposite, in consequence
of having improperly admitted, as a part of savage man's care for
self-preservation, the gratification of a multitude of passions which
are the work of society, and have made laws necessary. A bad man, he
says, is a robust child. But it remains to be proved whether man in
a state of nature is this robust child: and, should we grant that he
is, what would he infer? Why truly, that if this man, when robust and
strong, were dependent on others as he is when feeble, there is no
extravagance he would not be guilty of; that he would beat his mother
when she was too slow in giving him her breast; that he would strangle
one of his younger brothers, if he should be troublesome to him, or
bite the arm of another, if he put him to any inconvenience. But that
man in the state of nature is both strong and dependent involves two
contrary suppositions. Man is weak when he is dependent, and is his
own master before he comes to be strong. Hobbes did not reflect that
the same cause, which prevents a savage from making use of his reason,
as our jurists hold, prevents him also from abusing his faculties, as
Hobbes himself allows: so that it may be justly said that savages are
not bad merely because they do not know what it is to be good: for it
is neither the development of the understanding nor the restraint
of law that hinders them from doing ill; but the peacefulness of
their passions, and their ignorance of vice: _tanto plus in illis
proficit vitiorum ignoratio, quam in his cognitio virtutis_.[2] There
is another principle which has escaped Hobbes; which, having been
bestowed on mankind, to moderate, on certain occasions, the impetuosity
of egoism, or, before its birth, the desire of self-preservation,
tempers the ardour with which he pursues his own welfare, by an innate
repugnance at seeing a fellow-creature suffer.[3] I think I need not
fear contradiction in holding man to be possessed of the only natural
virtue, which could not be denied him by the most violent detractor
of human virtue. I am speaking of compassion which is a disposition
suitable to creatures so weak and subject to so many evils as we
certainly are: by so much the more universal and useful to mankind,
as it comes before any kind of reflection; and at the same time so
natural, that the very brutes themselves sometimes give evident proofs
of it. Not to mention the tenderness of mothers for their offspring and
the perils they encounter to save them from danger, it is well known
that horses show a reluctance to trample on living bodies. One animal
never passes by the dead body of another of its species: there are even
some which give their fellows a sort of burial; while the mournful
lowings of the cattle when they enter the slaughter-house show the
impressions made on them by the horrible spectacle which meets them.
We find, with pleasure, the author of the Fable of the Bees obliged to
own that man is a compassionate and sensible being, and laying aside
his cold subtlety of style, in the example he gives, to present us with
the pathetic description of a man who, from a place of confinement,
is compelled to behold a wild beast tear a child from the arms of its
mother, grinding its tender limbs with its murderous teeth, and tearing
its palpitating entrails with its claws. What horrid agitation must
not the eye-witness of such a scene experience, although he would not
be personally concerned! What anxiety would he not suffer at not being
able to give any assistance to the fainting mother and the dying infant!

Such is the pure emotion of nature, prior to all kinds of reflection!
Such is the force of natural compassion, which the greatest depravity
of morals has as yet hardly been able to destroy! for we daily find
at our theatres men affected, nay shedding tears at the sufferings of
a wretch who, were he in the tyrant's place, would probably even add
to the torments of his enemies; like the bloodthirsty Sulla, who was
so sensitive to ills he had not caused, or that Alexander of Pheros
who did not dare to go and see any tragedy acted, for fear of being
seen weeping with Andromache and Priam, though he could listen without
emotion to the cries of all the citizens who were daily strangled at
his command.


                   _Mollissima corda_
    _Humano generi dare se natura fatetur,_
    _Qua lacrimas dedit._
                     Juvenal, Satire xv, 151.[4]



Mandeville well knew that, in spite of all their morality, men would
have never been better than monsters, had not nature bestowed on them
a sense of compassion, to aid their reason: but he did not see that
from this quality alone flow all those social virtues, of which he
denied man the possession. But what is generosity, clemency or humanity
but compassion applied to the weak, to the guilty, or to mankind in
general? Even benevolence and friendship are, if we judge rightly, only
the effects of compassion, constantly set upon a particular object: for
how is it different to wish that another person may not suffer pain
and uneasiness and to wish him happy? Were it even true that pity is
no more than a feeling, which puts us in the place of the sufferer,
a feeling, obscure yet lively in a savage, developed yet feeble in
civilised man; this truth would have no other consequence than to
confirm my argument. Compassion must, in fact, be the stronger, the
more the animal beholding any kind of distress identifies himself with
the animal that suffers. Now, it is plain that such identification
must have been much more perfect in a state of nature than it is in
a state of reason. It is reason that engenders self-respect, and
reflection that confirms it: it is reason which turns man's mind back
upon itself, and divides him from everything that could disturb or
afflict him. It is philosophy that isolates him, and bids him say, at
sight of the misfortunes of others: "Perish if you will, I am secure."
Nothing but such general evils as threaten the whole community can
disturb the tranquil sleep of the philosopher, or tear him from his
bed. A murder may with impunity be committed under his window; he has
only to put his hands to his ears and argue a little with himself, to
prevent nature, which is shocked within him, from identifying itself
with the unfortunate sufferer. Uncivilised man has not this admirable
talent; and for want of reason and wisdom, is always foolishly ready to
obey the first promptings of humanity. It is the populace that flocks
together at riots and street-brawls, while the wise man prudently makes
off. It is the mob and the market-women, who part the combatants, and
hinder gentle-folks from cutting one another's throats.

It is then certain that compassion is a natural feeling which, by
moderating the violence of love of self in each individual, contributes
to the preservation of the whole species. It is this compassion that
hurries us without reflection to the relief of those who are in
distress: it is this which in a state of nature supplies the place of
laws, morals and virtues, with the advantage that none are tempted to
disobey its gentle voice: it is this which will always prevent a sturdy
savage from robbing a weak child or a feeble old man of the sustenance
they may have with pain and difficulty acquired, if he sees a
possibility of providing for himself by other means: it is this which,
instead of inculcating that sublime maxim of rational justice, _Do to
others as you would have them do unto you,_ inspires all men with that
other maxim of natural goodness, much less perfect indeed, but perhaps
more useful; _Do good to yourself with as little evil as possible to
others._ In a word, it is rather in this natural feeling than in any
subtle arguments that we must look for the cause of that repugnance,
which every man would experience in doing evil, even independently of
the maxims of education. Although it might belong to Socrates and other
minds of the like craft to acquire virtue by reason, the human race
would long since have ceased to be, had its preservation depended only
on the reasonings of the individuals composing it.

With passions so little active, and so good a curb, men, being rather
wild than wicked, and more intent to guard themselves against the
mischief that might be done them, than to do mischief to others, were
by no means subject to very perilous dissensions. They maintained no
kind of intercourse with one another, and were consequently strangers
to vanity, deference, esteem and contempt; they had not the least
idea of _meum_ and _tuum_, and no true conception of justice; they
looked upon every violence to which they were subjected, rather as an
injury that might easily be repaired than as a crime that ought to be
punished; and they never thought of taking revenge, unless perhaps
mechanically and on the spot, as a dog will sometimes bite the stone
which is thrown at him. Their quarrels therefore would seldom have
very bloody consequences; for the subject of them would be merely the
question of subsistence. But I am aware of one greater danger, which
remains to be noticed.

Of the passions that stir the heart of man, there is one which
makes the sexes necessary to each other, and is extremely ardent
and impetuous; a terrible passion that braves danger, surmounts all
obstacles, and in its transports seems calculated to bring destruction
on the human race which it is really destined to preserve. What must
become of men who are left to this brutal and boundless rage, without
modesty, without shame, and daily upholding their amours at the price
of their blood?

It must, in the first place, be allowed that, the more violent the
passions are, the more are laws necessary to keep them under restraint.
But, setting aside the inadequacy of laws to effect this purpose, which
is evident from the crimes and disorders to which these passions daily
give rise among us, we should do well to inquire if these evils did not
spring up with the laws themselves; for in this case, even if the laws
were capable of repressing such evils, it is the least that could be
expected from them, that they should check a mischief which would not
have arisen without them.

Let us begin by distinguishing between the physical and moral
ingredients in the feeling of love. The physical part of love is that
general desire which urges the sexes to union with each other. The
moral part is that which determines and fixes this desire exclusively
upon one particular object; or at least gives it a greater degree of
energy toward the object thus preferred. It is easy to see that the
moral part of love is a factitious feeling, born of social usage, and
enhanced by the women with much care and cleverness, to establish their
empire, and put in power the sex which ought to obey. This feeling,
being founded on certain ideas of beauty and merit which a savage is
not in a position to acquire, and on comparisons which he is incapable
of making, must be for him almost non-existent; for, as his mind
cannot form abstract ideas of proportion and regularity, so his heart
is not susceptible of the feelings of love and admiration, which are
even insensibly produced by the application of these ideas. He follows
solely the character nature has implanted in him, and not tastes which
he could never have acquired; so that every woman equally answers his
purpose.

Men in a state of nature being confined merely to what is physical in
love, and fortunate enough to be ignorant of those excellences, which
whet the appetite while they increase the difficulty of gratifying
it, must be subject to fewer and less violent fits of passion,
and consequently fall into fewer and less violent disputes. The
imagination, which causes such ravages among us, never speaks to the
heart of savages, who quietly await the impulses of nature, yield to
them involuntarily, with more pleasure than ardour, and, their wants
once satisfied, lose the desire. It is therefore incontestable that
love, as well as all other passions, must have acquired in society
that glowing impetuosity, which makes it so often fatal to mankind.
And it is the more absurd to represent savages as continually cutting
one another's throats to indulge their brutality, because this opinion
is directly contrary to experience; the Caribeans, who have as yet
least of all deviated from the state of nature, being in fact the most
peaceable of people in their amours, and the least subject to jealousy,
though they live in a hot climate which seems always to inflame the
passions.

With regard to the inferences that might be drawn, in the case of
several species of animals, the males of which fill our poultry-yards
with blood and slaughter, or in spring make the forests resound with
their quarrels over their females; we must begin by excluding all those
species, in which nature has plainly established, in the comparative
power of the sexes, relations different from those which exist among
us: thus we can base no conclusion about men on the habits of fighting
cocks. In those species where the proportion is better observed, these
battles must be entirely due to the scarcity of females in comparison
with males; or, what amounts to the same thing, to the intervals during
which the female constantly refuses the advances of the male: for if
each female admits the male but during two months in the year, it
is the same as if the number of females were five-sixths less. Now,
neither of these two cases is applicable to the human species, in
which the number of females usually exceeds that of males, and among
whom it has never been observed, even among savages, that the females
have, like those of other animals, their stated times of passion and
indifference. Moreover, in several of these species, the individuals
all take fire at once, and there comes a fearful moment of universal
passion, tumult and disorder among them; a scene which is never beheld
in the human species, whose love is not thus seasonal. We must not
then conclude from the combats of such animals for the enjoyment of
the females, that the case would be the same with mankind in a state
of nature: and, even if we drew such a conclusion, we see that such
contests do not exterminate other kinds of animals, and we have no
reason to think they would be more fatal to ours. It is indeed clear
that they would do still less mischief than is the case in a state of
society; especially in those countries in which, morals being still
held in some repute, the jealousy of lovers and the vengeance of
husbands are the daily cause of duels, murders, and even worse crimes;
where the obligation of eternal fidelity only occasions adultery, and
the very laws of honour and continence necessarily increase debauchery
and lead to the multiplication of abortions.

Let us conclude then that man in a state of nature, wandering up
and down the forests, without industry, without speech, and without
home, an equal stranger to war and to all ties, neither standing in
need of his fellow-creatures nor having any desire to hurt them, and
perhaps even not distinguishing them one from another; let us conclude
that, being self-sufficient and subject to so few passions, he could
have no feelings or knowledge but such as befitted his situation;
that he felt only his actual necessities, and disregarded everything
he did not think himself immediately concerned to notice, and that
his understanding made no greater progress than his vanity. If by
accident he made any discovery, he was the less able to communicate
it to others, as he did not know even his own children. Every art
would necessarily perish with its inventor, where there was no kind of
education among men, and generations succeeded generations without the
least advance; when, all setting out from the same point, centuries
must have elapsed in the barbarism of the first ages; when the race was
already old, and man remained a child.

If I have expatiated at such length on this supposed primitive state,
it is because I had so many ancient errors and inveterate prejudices
to eradicate, and therefore thought it incumbent on me to dig down to
their very root, and show, by means of a true picture of the state
of nature, how far even the natural inequalities of mankind are from
having that reality and influence which modern writers suppose.

It is in fact easy to see that many of the differences which
distinguish men are merely the effect of habit and the different
methods of life men adopt in society. Thus a robust or delicate
constitution, and the strength or weakness attaching to it, are more
frequently the effects of a hardy or effeminate method of education
than of the original endowment of the body. It is the same with the
powers of the mind; for education not only makes a difference between
such as are cultured and such as are not, but even increases the
differences which exist among the former, in proportion to their
respective degrees of culture: as the distance between a giant and
a dwarf on the same road increases with every step they take. If we
compare the prodigious diversity, which obtains in the education and
manner of life of the various orders of men in the state of society,
with the uniformity and simplicity of animal and savage life, in
which every one lives on the same kind of food and in exactly the
same manner, and does exactly the same things, it is easy to conceive
how much less the difference between man and man must be in a state
of nature than in a state of society, and how greatly the natural
inequality of mankind must be increased by the inequalities of social
institutions.

But even if nature really affected, in the distribution of her gifts,
that partiality which is imputed to her, what advantage would the
greatest of her favourites derive from it, to the detriment of others,
in a state that admits of hardly any kind of relation between them?
Where there is no love, of what advantage is beauty? Of what use is wit
to those who do not converse, or cunning to those who have no business
with others? I hear it constantly repeated that, in such a state, the
strong would oppress the weak; but what is here meant by oppression?
Some, it is said, would violently domineer over others, who would
groan under a servile submission to their caprices. This indeed is
exactly what I observe to be the case among us; but I do not see how
it can be inferred of men in a state of nature, who could not easily
be brought to conceive what we mean by dominion and servitude. One
man, it is true, might seize the fruits which another had gathered,
the game he had killed, or the cave he had chosen for shelter; but how
would he ever be able to exact obedience, and what ties of dependence
could there be among men without possessions? If, for instance, I am
driven from one tree, I can go to the next; if I am disturbed in one
place, what hinders me from going to another? Again, should I happen to
meet with a man so much stronger than myself, and at the same time so
depraved, so indolent, and so barbarous, as to compel me to provide for
his sustenance while he himself remains idle; he must take care not to
have his eyes off me for a single moment; he must bind me fast before
he goes to sleep, or I shall certainly either knock him on the head
or make my escape. That is to say, he must in such a case voluntarily
expose himself to much greater trouble than he seeks to avoid, or can
give me. After all this, let him be off his guard ever so little;
let him but turn his head aside at any sudden noise, and I shall be
instantly twenty paces off, lost in the forest, and, my fetters burst
asunder, he would never see me again.

Without my expatiating thus uselessly on these details, every one
must see that as the bonds of servitude are formed merely by the
mutual dependence of men on one another and the reciprocal needs that
unite them, it is impossible to make any man a slave, unless he be
first reduced to a situation in which he cannot do without the help
of others: and, since such a situation does not exist in a state of
nature, every one is there his own master, and the law of the strongest
is of no effect.

Having proved that the inequality of mankind is hardly felt, and that
its influence is next to nothing in a state of nature, I must next
show its origin and trace its progress in the successive developments
of the human mind. Having shown that human _perfectibility_, the
social virtues, and the other faculties which natural man potentially
possessed, could never develop of themselves, but must require the
fortuitous concurrence of many foreign causes that might never arise,
and without which he would have remained for ever in his primitive
condition, I must now collect and consider the different accidents
which may have improved the human understanding while depraving the
species, and made man wicked while making him sociable; so as to bring
him and the world from that distant period to the point at which we now
behold them.

I confess that, as the events I am going to describe might have
happened in various ways, I have nothing to determine my choice but
conjectures: but such conjectures become reasons, when they are the
most probable that can be drawn from the nature of things, and the only
means of discovering the truth. The consequences, however, which I mean
to deduce will not be barely conjectural; as, on the principles just
laid down, it would be impossible to form any other theory that would
not furnish the same results, and from which I could not draw the same
conclusions.

This will be a sufficient apology for my not dwelling on the manner in
which the lapse of time compensates for the little probability in the
events; on the surprising power of trivial causes, when their action is
constant; on the impossibility, on the one hand, of destroying certain
hypotheses, though on the other we cannot give them the certainty of
known matters of fact; on its being within the province of history,
when two facts are given as real, and have to be connected by a series
of intermediate facts, which are unknown or supposed to be so, to
supply such facts as may connect them; and on its being in the province
of philosophy when history is silent, to determine similar facts to
serve the same end; and lastly, on the influence of similarity, which,
in the case of events, reduces the facts to a much smaller number of
different classes than is commonly imagined. It is enough for me to
offer these hints to the consideration of my judges, and to have so
arranged that the general reader has no need to consider them at all.


[1] See Appendix.

[2] Justin. Hist, ii, 2. So much more does the ignorance of vice profit
the one sort than the knowledge of virtue the other.

[3] Egoism must not be confused with self-respect: for they differ both
in themselves and in their effects. Self-respect is a natural feeling
which leads every animal to look to its own preservation, and which,
guided in man by reason and modified by compassion, creates humanity
and virtue. Egoism is a purely relative and factitious feeling, which
arises in the state of society, leads each individual to make more of
himself than of any other, causes all the mutual damage men inflict one
on another, and is the real source of the "sense of honour." This being
understood, I maintain that, in our primitive condition, in the true
state of nature, egoism did not exist; for as each man regarded himself
as the only observer of his actions, the only being in the universe who
took any interest in him, and the sole judge of his deserts, no feeling
arising from comparisons he could not be led to make could take root
in his soul; and for the same reason, he could know neither hatred nor
the desire for revenge, since these passions can spring only from a
sense of injury: and as it is the contempt or the intention to hurt,
and not the harm done, which constitutes the injury, men who neither
valued nor compared themselves could do one another much violence, when
it suited them, without feeling any sense of injury. In a word, each
man, regarding his fellows almost as he regarded animals of different
species, might seize the prey of a weaker or yield up his own to a
stronger, and yet consider these acts of violence as mere natural
occurrences, without the slightest emotion of insolence or despite, or
any other feeling than the joy or grief of success or failure.

[4] Nature avows she gave the human race the softest hearts, who gave <
them tears.




THE SECOND PART


The first man who, having enclosed a piece of ground, bethought himself
of saying _This is mine_, and found people simple enough to believe
him, was the real founder of civil society. From how many crimes, wars
and murders, from how many horrors and misfortunes might not any one
have saved mankind, by pulling up the stakes, or filling up the ditch,
and crying to his fellows, "Beware of listening to this impostor; you
are undone if you once forget that the fruits of the earth, belong to
us all, and the earth itself to nobody." But there is great probability
that things had then already come to such a pitch, that they could no
longer continue as they were; for the idea of property depends on many
prior ideas, which could only be acquired successively, and cannot have
been formed all at once in the human mind.

Mankind must have made very considerable progress, and acquired
considerable knowledge and industry which they must also have
transmitted and increased from age to age, before they arrived at this
last point of the state of nature. Let us then go farther back and
endeavour to unify under a single point of view that slow succession of
events and discoveries in the most natural order.

Man's first feeling was that of his own existence, and his first care
that of self-preservation. The produce of the earth furnished him
with all he needed, and instinct told him how to use it. Hunger and
other appetites made him at various times experience various modes of
existence; and among these was one which urged him to propagate his
species--a blind propensity that, having nothing to do with the heart,
produced a merely animal act. The want once gratified, the two sexes
knew each other no more; and even the offspring was nothing to its
mother, as soon as it could do without her.

Such was the condition of infant man; the life of an animal limited
at first to mere sensations, and hardly profiting by the gifts nature
bestowed on him, much less capable of entertaining a thought of forcing
anything from her. But difficulties soon presented themselves, and
it became necessary to learn how to surmount them: the height of the
trees, which prevented him from gathering their fruits, the competition
of other animals desirous of the same fruits, and the ferocity of those
who needed them for their own preservation, all obliged him to apply
himself to bodily exercises. He had to be active, swift of foot, and
vigorous in light. Natural weapons, stones and sticks, were easily
found: he learnt to surmount the obstacles of nature, to contend in
case of necessity with other animals, and to dispute for the means of
subsistence even with other men, or to indemnify himself for what he
was forced to give up to a stronger.

In proportion as the human race grew more numerous, men's cares
increased. The difference of soils, climates and seasons, must have
introduced some differences into their manner of living. Barren years,
long and sharp winters, scorching summers which parched the fruits of
the earth, must have demanded a new industry. On the sea-shore and the
banks of rivers, they invented the hook and line, and became fishermen
and eaters of fish. In the forests they made bows and arrows, and
became huntsmen and warriors. In cold countries they clothed themselves
with the skins of the beasts they had slain. The lightning, a volcano,
or some lucky chance acquainted them with fire, a new resource against
the rigours of winter: they next learned how to preserve this element,
then how to reproduce it, and finally how to prepare with it the flesh
of animals which before they had eaten raw.

This repeated relevance of various beings to himself, and one to
another, would naturally give rise in the human mind to the perceptions
of certain relations between them. Thus the relations which we denote
by the terms, great, small, strong, weak, swift, slow, fearful, bold,
and the like, almost insensibly compared at need, must have at length
produced in him a kind of reflection, or rather a mechanical prudence,
which would indicate to him the precautions most necessary to his
security.

The new intelligence which resulted from this development increased his
superiority over other animals, by making him sensible of it. He would
now endeavour, therefore, to ensnare them, would play them a thousand
tricks, and though many of them might surpass him in swiftness or in
strength, would in time become the master of some and the scourge of
others. Thus, the first time he looked into himself, he felt the first
emotion of pride; and, at a time when he scarce knew how to distinguish
the different orders of beings, by looking upon his species as of the
highest order, he prepared the way for assuming pre-eminence as an
individual.

Other men, it is true, were not then to him what they now are to us,
and he had no greater intercourse with them than with other animals;
yet they were not neglected in his observations. The conformities,
which he would in time discover between them, and between himself and
his female, led him to judge of others which were not then perceptible;
and finding that they all behaved as he himself would have done in like
circumstances, he naturally inferred that their manner of thinking
and acting was altogether in conformity with his own. This important
truth, once deeply impressed on his mind, must have induced him, from
an intuitive feeling more certain and much more rapid than any kind of
reasoning, to pursue the rules of conduct, which he had best observe
towards them, for his own security and advantage.

Taught by experience that the love of well-being is the sole motive of
human actions, he found himself in a position to distinguish the few
cases, in which mutual interest might justify him in relying upon the
assistance of his fellows; and also the still fewer cases in which a
conflict of interests might give cause to suspect them. In the former
case, he joined in the same herd with them, or at most in some kind of
loose association, that laid no restraint on its members, and lasted no
longer than the transitory occasion that formed it. In the latter case,
every one sought his own private advantage, either by open force, if he
thought himself strong enough, or by address and cunning, if he felt
himself the weaker.

In this manner, men may have insensibly acquired some gross ideas of
mutual undertakings, and of the advantages of fulfilling them: that
is, just so far as their present and apparent interest was concerned:
for they were perfect strangers to foresight, and were so far from
troubling themselves about the distant future, that they hardly thought
of the morrow. If a deer was to be taken, every one saw that, in
order to succeed, he must abide faithfully by his post: but if a hare
happened to come within the reach of any one of them, it is not to be
doubted that he pursued it without scruple, and, having seized his
prey, cared very little, if by so doing he caused his companions to
miss theirs.

It is easy to understand that such intercourse would not require a
language much more refined than that of rooks or monkeys, who associate
together for much the same, purpose. Inarticulate cries, plenty of
gestures and some imitative sounds, must have been for a long time the
universal language; and by the addition, in every country, of some
conventional articulate sounds (of which, as I have already intimated,
the first institution is not too easy to explain) particular languages
were produced; but these were rude and imperfect, and nearly such as
now to be found among some savage nations.

Hurried on by the rapidity of time, by the abundance of things I have
to say, and by the almost insensible progress of things in their
beginnings, I pass over in an instant a multitude of ages; for the
slower the events were in their succession, the more rapidly may they
be described.

These first advances enabled men to make others with greater rapidity.
In proportion as they grew enlightened, they grew industrious. They
ceased to fall asleep under the first tree, or in the first cave that
afforded them shelter; they invented several kinds of implements of
hard and sharp stones, which they used to dig up the earth, and to
cut wood; they then made huts out of branches, and afterwards learnt
to plaster them over with mud and clay. This was the epoch of a
first revolution, which established and distinguished families, and
introduced a kind of property, in itself the source of a thousand
quarrels and conflicts. As, however, the strongest were probably the
first to build themselves huts which they felt themselves able to
defend, it may be concluded that the weak found it much easier and
safer to imitate, than to attempt to dislodge them: and of those
who were once provided with huts, none could have any inducement to
appropriate that of his neighbour; not indeed so much because it did
not belong to him, as because it could be of no use, and he could not
make himself master of it without exposing himself to a desperate
battle with the family which occupied it.

The first expansions of the human heart were the effects of a novel
situation, which united husbands and wives, fathers and children, under
one roof. The habit of living together soon gave rise to the finest
feelings known to humanity, conjugal love and paternal affection. Every
family became a little society, the more united because liberty--and
reciprocal attachment were the only bonds of its union. The sexes,
whose manner of life had been hitherto the same, began now to adopt
different ways of living. The women became more sedentary, and
accustomed themselves to mind the hut and their children, while the
men went abroad in search of their common subsistence. From living a
softer life, both sexes also began to lose something of their strength
and ferocity: but, if individuals became to some extent less able to
encounter wild beasts separately, they found it, on the other hand,
easier to assemble and resist in common.

The simplicity and solitude of man's life in this new condition, the
paucity of his wants, and the implements he had invented to satisfy
them, left him a great deal of leisure, which he employed to furnish
himself with many conveniences unknown to his fathers: and this was the
first yoke he inadvertently imposed on himself, and the first source
of the evils he prepared for his descendants. For, besides continuing
thus to enervate both body and mind, these conveniences lost with use
almost all their power to please, and even degenerated into real needs,
till the want of them became far more disagreeable than the possession
of them had been pleasant. Men would have been unhappy at the loss of
them, though the possession did not make them happy.

We can here see a little better how the use of speech became
established, and insensibly improved in each family, and we may form
a conjecture also concerning the manner in which various causes may
have extended and accelerated the progress of language, by making it
more and more necessary. Floods or earthquakes surrounded inhabited
districts with precipices or waters: revolutions of the globe tore off
portions from the continent, and made them islands. It is readily seen
that among men thus collected and compelled to live together, a common
idiom must have arisen much more easily than among those who still
wandered through the forests of the continent. Thus it is very possible
that after their first essays in navigation the islanders brought over
the use of speech to the continent: and it is at least very probable
that communities and languages were first established in islands, and
even came to perfection there before they were known on the mainland.

Everything now begins to change its aspect. Men, who have up to now
been roving in the woods, by taking to a more settled manner of life,
come gradually together, form separate bodies, and at length in every
country arises a distinct nation, united in character and manners,
not by regulations or laws, but by uniformity of life and food, and
the common influence of climate. Permanent neighbourhood could not
fail to produce, in time, some connection between different families.
Among young people of opposite sexes, living in neighbouring huts,
the transient commerce required by nature soon led, through mutual
intercourse, to another kind not less agreeable, and more permanent.
Men began now to take the difference between objects into account,
and to make comparisons; they acquired imperceptibly the ideas of
beauty and merit, which soon gave rise to feelings of preference. In
consequence of seeing each other often, they could not do without
seeing each other constantly. A tender and pleasant feeling insinuated
itself into their souls, and the least opposition turned it into an
impetuous fury: with love arose jealousy; discord triumphed, and human
blood was sacrificed to the gentlest of all passions.

As ideas and feelings succeeded one another, and heart and head
were brought into play, men continued to lay aside their original
wildness; their private connections became every day more intimate
as their limits extended. They accustomed themselves to assemble
before their huts round a large tree; singing and dancing, the true
offspring of love and leisure, became the amusement, or rather the
occupation, of men and women thus assembled together with nothing
else to do. Each one began to consider the rest, and to wish to be
considered in turn; and thus a--value came to be attached to public
esteem. Whoever sang or danced best, whoever was the handsomest, the
strongest, the most dexterous, or the most eloquent, came to be of
most consideration; and this was the first step towards inequality,
and at the same time towards vice. From these first distinctions arose
on the one side vanity and contempt and on the other shame and envy:
and the fermentation caused by these new leavens ended by producing
combinations fatal to innocence and happiness.

As soon as men began to value one another, and the idea of
consideration had got a footing in the mind, every one put in his claim
to it, and it became impossible to refuse it to any with impunity.
Hence arose the first obligations of civility even among savages; and
every intended injury became an affront; because, besides the hurt
which might result from it, the party injured was certain to find in it
a contempt for his person, which was often more insupportable than the
hurt itself.

Thus, as every man punished the contempt shown him by others, in
proportion to his opinion of himself, revenge became terrible, and men
bloody and cruel. This is precisely the state reached by most of the
savage nations known to us: and it is for want of having made a proper
distinction in our ideas, and seen how very far they already are from
the state of nature, that so many writers have hastily concluded that
man is naturally cruel, and requires civil institutions to make him
more mild; whereas nothing is more gentle than man in his primitive
state, as he is placed by nature at an equal distance from the
stupidity of brutes, and the fatal ingenuity of civilised man. Equally
confined by instinct and reason to the sole care of guarding himself
against the mischiefs which threaten him, he is restrained by natural
compassion from doing any injury to others, and is not led to do such a
thing even in return for injuries received. For, according to the axiom
of the wise Locke, _There can be no injury, where there is no property_.

But it must be remarked that the society thus formed, and the relations
thus established among men, required of them qualities different from
those which they possessed from their primitive constitution. Morality
began to appear in human actions, and every one, before the institution
of law, was the only judge and avenger of the injuries done him, so
that the goodness which was suitable in the pure state of nature was
no longer proper in the new-born state of society. Punishments had
to be made more severe, as opportunities of offending became more
frequent, and the dread of vengeance had to take the place of the
rigour of the law. Thus, though men had become less patient, and their
natural compassion had already suffered some diminution, this period
of expansion of the human faculties, keeping a just mean between the
indolence of the primitive state and the petulant activity of our
egoism, must have been the happiest and most stable of epochs. The
more we reflect on it, the more we shall find that this state was the
least subject to revolutions, and altogether the very best man could
experience; so that he can have departed from it only through some
fatal accident, which, for the public good, should never have happened.
The example of savages, most of whom have been found in this state,
seems to prove that men were meant to remain in it, that it is the
real youth of the world, and that all subsequent advances have been
apparently so many steps towards the perfection of the individual, but
in reality towards the decrepitude of the species.

So long as men remained content with their rustic huts, so long as
they were satisfied with clothes made of the skins of animals and sewn
together with thorns and fish-bones, adorned themselves only with
feathers and shells, and continued to paint their bodies different
colours, to improve and beautify their bows and arrows and to make
with sharp-edged stones fishing boats or clumsy musical instruments;
in a word, so long as they undertook only what a single person could
accomplish, and confined themselves to such arts as did not require the
joint labour of several hands, they lived free, healthy, honest and
happy lives, so long as their nature allowed, and as they continued to
enjoy the pleasures of mutual and independent intercourse. But from
the moment one man began to stand in need of the help of another; from
the moment it appeared advantageous to any one man to have enough
provisions for two, equality disappeared, property was introduced, work
became indispensable, and vast forests became smiling fields, which man
had to water with the sweat of his brow, and where slavery and misery
were soon seen to germinate and grow up with the crops.

Metallurgy and agriculture were the two arts which produced this great
revolution. The poets tell us it was gold and silver, but, for the
philosophers, it was iron and corn, which first civilised men, and
ruined humanity. Thus both were unknown to the savages of America, who
for that reason are still savage; the other nations also seem to have
continued in a state of barbarism while they practised only one of
these arts. One of the best reasons, perhaps, why Europe has been, if
not longer, at least more constantly and highly civilised than the rest
of the world, is that it is at once the most abundant in iron and the
most fertile in corn.

It is difficult to conjecture how men first came to know and use iron;
for it is impossible to suppose they would of themselves think of
digging the ore out of the mine, and preparing it for smelting, before
they knew what would be the result. On the other hand, we have the less
reason to suppose this discovery the effect of any accidental fire, as
mines are only formed in barren places, bare of trees and plants; so
that it looks as if nature had taken pains to keep the fatal secret
from us. There remains, therefore, only the extraordinary accident
of some volcano which, by ejecting metallic substances already in
fusion, suggested to the spectators the idea of imitating the natural
operation. And we must further conceive them as possessed of uncommon
courage and foresight, to undertake so laborious a work, with so
distant a prospect of drawing advantage from it; yet these qualities
are united only in minds more advanced than we can suppose those of
these first discoverers to have been.

With regard to agriculture, the principles of it were known long before
they were put in practice; and it is indeed hardly possible that men,
constantly employed in drawing their subsistence from plants and trees,
should not readily acquire a knowledge of the means made use of by
nature for the propagation of vegetables. It was in all probability
very fang, however, before their industry took that turn, either
because trees, which together with hunting and fishing afforded them
food, did not require their attention; or because they were ignorant of
the use of corn, or without instruments to cultivate it; or because
they lacked foresight to future needs; or lastly, because they were
without means of preventing others from robbing them of the fruit of
their labour.

When they grew more industrious, it is natural to believe that they
began, with the help of sharp stones and pointed sticks, to cultivate
a few vegetables or roots around their huts; though it was long before
they knew how to prepare corn, or were provided with the implements
necessary for raising it in any large quantity; not to mention how
essential it is, for husbandry, to consent to immediate loss, in order
to reap a future gain--a precaution very foreign to the turn of a
savage's mind; for, as I have said, he hardly foresees in the morning
what he will need at night.

The invention of the other arts must therefore have been necessary
to compel mankind to apply themselves to agriculture. No sooner were
artificers wanted to smelt and forge iron, than others were required
to maintain them; the more hands that were employed in manufactures,
the fewer were left to provide for the common subsistence, though
the number of mouths to be furnished with food remained the same:
and as some required commodities in exchange for their iron, the
rest at length discovered the method of making iron serve for the
multiplication of commodities. By this means the arts of husbandry and
agriculture were established on the one hand, and the art of working
metals and multiplying their uses on the other.

The cultivation of the earth necessarily brought about its
distribution; and property, once recognised, gave rise to the first
rules of justice; for, to secure each man his own, it had to be
possible for each to have something. Besides, as men began to look
forward to the future, and all had something to lose, every one
had reason to apprehend that reprisals would follow any injury he
might do to another. This origin is so much the more natural, as it
is impossible to conceive how property can come from anything but
manual labour: for what else can a man add to things which he does
not originally create, so as to make them his own property? It is the
husbandman's labour alone that, giving him a title to the produce of
the ground he has tilled, gives him a claim also to the land itself,
at least till harvest; and so, from year to year, a constant possession
which is easily transformed into property. When the ancients, says
Grotius, gave to Ceres the title of Legislatrix, and to a festival
celebrated in her honour the name of Thesmophoria, they meant by that
that the distribution of lands had produced a new kind of right: that
is to say, the right of property, which is different from the right
deducible from the law of nature.

In this state of affairs, equality might have been sustained, had the
talents of individuals been equal, and had, for example, the use of
iron and the consumption of commodities always exactly balanced each
other; but, as there was nothing to preserve this balance, it was
soon disturbed; the strongest did most work; the most skilful turned
his labour to best account; the most ingenious devised methods of
diminishing his labour: the husbandman wanted more iron, or the smith
more corn, and, while both laboured equally, the one gained a great
deal by his work, while the other could hardly support himself. Thus
natural inequality unfolds itself insensibly with that of combination,
and the difference between men, developed by their different
circumstances, becomes more sensible and permanent in its effects, and
begins to have an influence, in the same proportion, over the lot of
individuals.

Matters once at this pitch, it is easy to imagine the rest. I shall not
detain the reader with a description of the successive invention of
other arts, the development of language, the trial and utilisation of
talents, the inequality of fortunes, the use and abuse of riches, and
all the details connected with them which the reader can easily supply
for himself. I shall confine myself to a glance at mankind in this new
situation.

Behold then all human faculties developed, memory and imagination in
full play, egoism interested, reason active, and the mind almost at the
highest point of its perfection. Behold all the natural qualities in
action, the rank and condition of every man assigned him; not merely
his share of property and his power to serve or injure others, but
also his wit, beauty, strength or skill, merit or talents: and these
being the only qualities capable of commanding respect, it soon became
necessary to possess or to affect them.

It now became the interest of men to appear what they really were
not. To be and to seem became two totally different things; and from
this distinction sprang insolent pomp and cheating trickery, with all
the numerous vices that go in their train. On the other hand, free
and independent as men were before, they were now, in consequence of
a multiplicity of new wants, brought into subjection, as it were,
to all nature, and particularly to one another; and each became in
some degree a slave even in becoming the master of other men: if
rich, they stood in need of the services of others; if poor, of their
assistance; and even a middle condition did not enable them to do
without one another. Man must now, therefore, have been perpetually
employed in getting others to interest themselves in his lot, and in
making them, apparently at least, if not really, find their advantage
in promoting his own. Thus he must have been sly and artful in his
behaviour to some, and imperious and cruel to others; being under a
kind of necessity to ill-use all the persons of whom he stood in need,
when he could not frighten them into compliance, and did not judge it
his interest to be useful to them. Insatiable ambition, the thirst of
raising their respective fortunes, not so much from real want as from
the desire to surpass others, inspired all men with a vile propensity
to injure one another, and with a secret jealousy, which is the more
dangerous, as it puts on the mask of benevolence, to carry its point
with greater security. In a word, there arose rivalry and competition
on the one hand, and conflicting interests on the other, together with
a secret desire on both of profiting at the expense of others. All
these evils were the first effects of property, and the inseparable
attendants of growing inequality.

Before the invention of signs to represent riches, wealth could hardly
consist in anything but lands and cattle, the only real possessions
men can have. But, when inheritances so increased in number and extent
as to occupy the whole of the land, and to border on one another, one
man could aggrandise himself only at the expense of another; at the
same time the supernumeraries, who had been too weak or too indolent to
make such acquisitions, and had grown poor without sustaining any loss,
because, while they saw everything change around them, they remained
still the same, were obliged to receive their subsistence, or steal
it, from the rich; and this soon bred, according to their different
characters, dominion and slavery, or violence and rapine. The wealthy,
on their part, had no sooner begun to taste the pleasure of command,
than they disdained all others, and, using their old slaves to acquire
new, thought of nothing but subduing and enslaving their neighbours;
like ravenous wolves, which, having once tasted human flesh, despise
every other food and thenceforth seek only men to devour.

Thus, as the most powerful or the most miserable considered their might
or misery as a kind of right to the possessions of others, equivalent,
in their opinion, to that of property, the destruction of equality
was attended by the most terrible disorders. Usurpations by the rich,
robbery by the poor, and the unbridled passions of both, suppressed
the cries of natural compassion and the still feeble voice of justice,
and filled men with avarice, ambition and vice. Between the title of
the strongest and that of the first occupier, there arose perpetual
conflicts, which never ended but in battles and bloodshed. The new-born
state of society thus gave rise to a horrible state of war; men thus
harassed and depraved were no longer capable of retracing their steps
or renouncing the fatal acquisitions they had made, but, labouring by
the abuse of the faculties which do them honour, merely to their own
confusion, brought themselves to the brink of ruin.

_Attonitus novitate mali, divesque miserque,_
_Effugere optat opes; et quæ modô voverat odit._[5]

It is impossible that men should not at length have reflected on so
wretched a situation, and on the calamities that overwhelmed them.
The rich, in particular, must have felt how much they suffered by a
constant state of war, of which they bore all the expense; and in
which, though all risked their lives, they alone risked their property.
Besides, however speciously they might disguise their usurpations,
they knew that they were founded on precarious and false titles; so
that, if others took from them by force what they themselves had
gained by force, they would have no reason to complain. Even those
who had been enriched by their own industry, could hardly base their
proprietorship on better claims. It was in vain to repeat, "I built
this well; I gained this spot by my industry." Who gave you your
standing, it might be answered, and what right have you to demand
payment of us for doing what we never asked you to do? Do you not
know that numbers of your fellow-creatures are starving, for want
of what you have too much of? You ought to have had the express and
universal consent of mankind, before appropriating more of the common
subsistence than you needed for your own maintenance. Destitute of
valid reasons to justify and sufficient strength to defend himself,
able to crush individuals with ease, but easily crushed himself by a
troop of bandits, one against all, and incapable, on account of mutual
jealousy, of joining with his equals against numerous enemies united
by the common hope of plunder, the rich man, thus urged by necessity,
conceived at length the profoundest plan that ever entered the mind of
man: this was to employ in his favour the forces of those who attacked
him, to make allies of his adversaries, to inspire them with different
maxims, and to give them other institutions as favourable to himself as
the law of nature was unfavourable.

With this view, after having represented to his neighbours the horror
of a situation which armed every man against the rest, and made their
possessions as burdensome to them as their wants, and in which no
safety could be expected either in riches or in poverty, he readily
devised plausible arguments to make them close with his design. "Let
us join," said he, "to guard the weak from oppression, to restrain the
ambitious, and secure to every man the possession of what belongs to
him: let us institute rules of justice and peace, to which all without
exception may be obliged to conform; rules that may in some measure
make amends for the caprices of fortune, by subjecting equally the
powerful and the weak to the observance of reciprocal obligations.
Let us, in a word, instead of turning our forces against ourselves,
collect them in a supreme power which may govern us by wise laws,
protect and defend all the members of the association, repulse their
common enemies, and maintain eternal harmony among us."

Far fewer words to this purpose would have been enough to impose on
men so barbarous and easily seduced; especially as they had too many
disputes among themselves to do without arbitrators, and too much
ambition and avarice to go long without masters. All ran headlong to
their chains, in hopes of securing their liberty; for they had just wit
enough to perceive the advantages of political institutions, without
experience enough to enable them to foresee the dangers. The most
capable of fore-seeing the dangers were the very persons who expected
to benefit by them; and even the most prudent judged it not inexpedient
to sacrifice one part of their freedom to ensure the rest; as a wounded
man has his arm cut off to save the rest of his body.

Such was, or may well have been, the origin of society and law, which
bound new fetters on the poor, and gave new powers to the rich; which
irretrievably destroyed natural liberty, eternally fixed the law of
property and inequality, converted clever usurpation into unalterable
right, and, for the advantage of a few ambitious individuals, subjected
all mankind to perpetual labour, slavery and wretchedness. It is easy
to see how the establishment of one community made that of all the
rest necessary, and how, in order to make head against united forces,
the rest of mankind had to unite in turn. Societies soon multiplied
and spread over the face of the earth, till hardly a corner of the
world was left in which a man could escape the yoke, and withdraw
his head from beneath the sword which he saw perpetually hanging
over him by a thread. Civil right having thus become the common rule
among the members of each community, the law of nature maintained its
place only between different communities, where, under the name of
the right of nations, it was qualified by certain tacit conventions,
in order to make commerce practicable, and serve as a substitute for
natural compassion, which lost, when applied to societies, almost
all the influence it had over individuals, and survived no longer
except in some great cosmopolitan spirits, who, breaking down the
imaginary barriers that separate different peoples, follow the example
of our Sovereign Creator, and include the whole human race in their
benevolence.

But bodies politic, remaining thus in a state of nature among
themselves, presently experienced the inconveniences which had obliged
individuals to forsake it; for this state became still more fatal
to these great bodies than it had been to the individuals of whom
they were composed. Hence arose national wars, battles, murders, and
reprisals, which shock nature and outrage reason; together with all
those horrible prejudices which class among the virtues the honour
of shedding human blood. The most distinguished men hence learned to
consider cutting each other's throats a duty; at length men massacred
their fellow-creatures by thousands without so much as knowing why, and
committed more murders in a single day's fighting, and more violent
outrages in the sack of a single town, than were committed in the state
of nature during whole ages over the whole earth. Such were the first
effects which we can see to have followed the division of mankind into
different communities. But let us return to their institutions.

I know that some writers have given other explanations of the origin
of political societies, such as the conquest of the powerful, or the
association of the weak. It is, indeed, indifferent to my argument
which of these causes we choose. That which I have just laid down,
however, appears to me the most natural for the following reasons.
First: because, in the first case, the right of conquest, being no
right, in itself, could not serve as a foundation on which to build any
other; the victor and the vanquished people still remained with respect
to each other in the state of war, unless the vanquished, restored to
the full possession of their liberty, voluntarily made choice of the
victor for their chief. For till then, whatever capitulation may have
been made being founded on violence, and therefore _ipso facto_ void,
there could not have been on this hypothesis either a real society or
body politic, or any law other than that of the strongest. Secondly:
because the words _strong_ and _weak_ are, in the second case,
ambiguous; for during the interval between the establishment of a right
of property, or prior occupancy, and that of political government,
the meaning of these words is better expressed by the terms _rich_ and
_poor_: because, in fact, before the institution of laws, men had no
other way of reducing their equals to submission, than by attacking
their goods, or making some of their own over to them. Thirdly:
because, as the poor had nothing but their freedom to lose, it would
have been in the highest degree absurd for them to resign voluntarily
the only good they still enjoyed, without getting anything in exchange:
whereas the rich having feelings, if I may so express myself, in
every part of their possessions, it was much easier to harm them, and
therefore more necessary for them to take precautions against it; and,
in short, because it is more reasonable to suppose a thing to have been
invented by those to whom it would be of service, than by those whom it
must have harmed.

Government had, in its infancy, no regular and constant form. The want
of experience and philosophy prevented men from seeing any but present
inconveniences, and they thought of providing against others only as
they presented themselves. In spite of the endeavours of the wisest
legislators, the political state remained imperfect, because it was
little more than the work of chance; and, as it had begun ill, though
time revealed its defects and suggested remedies, the original faults
were never repaired. It was continually being patched up, when the
first task should have been to get the site cleared and all the old
materials removed, as was done by Lycurgus at Sparta, if a stable and
lasting edifice was to be erected. Society consisted at first merely of
a few general conventions, which every member bound himself to observe;
and for the performance of covenants the whole body went security to
each individual. Experience only could show the weakness of such a
constitution, and how easily it might be infringed with impunity, from
the difficulty of convicting men of faults, where the public alone
was to be witness and judge: the laws could not but be eluded in many
ways; disorders and inconveniences could not but multiply continually,
till it became necessary to commit the dangerous trust of public
authority to private persons, and the care of enforcing obedience to
the deliberations of the people to the magistrate. For to say that
chiefs were chosen before the confederacy was formed, and that the
administrators of the laws were there before the laws themselves, is
too absurd a supposition to consider seriously.

It would be as unreasonable to suppose that men at first threw
themselves irretrievably and unconditionally into the arms of an
absolute master, and that the first expedient which proud and
unsubdued men hit upon for their common security was to run headlong
into slavery. For what reason, in fact, did they take to themselves
superiors, if it was not in order that they might be defended from
oppression, and have protection for their lives, liberties and
properties, which are, so to speak, the constituent elements of their
being? Now, in the relations between man and man, the worst that can
happen is for one to find himself at the mercy of another, and it would
have been inconsistent with common-sense to begin by bestowing on a
chief the only things they wanted his help to preserve. What equivalent
could he offer them for so great a right? And if he had presumed to
exact it under pretext of defending them, would he not have received
the answer recorded in the fable: "What more can the enemy do to us?"
It is therefore beyond dispute, and indeed the fundamental maxim of
all political right, that people have set up chiefs to protect their
liberty, and not to enslave them. _If we have a prince_, said Pliny to
Trajan, _it is to save ourselves from having a master_.

Politicians indulge in the same sophistry about the love of liberty
as philosophers about the state of nature. They judge, by what they
see, of very different things, which they have not seen; and attribute
to man a natural propensity to servitude, because the slaves within
their observation are seen to bear the yoke with patience; they fail
to reflect that it is with liberty as with innocence and virtue; the
value is known only to those who possess them, and the taste for them
is forfeited when they are forfeited themselves. "I know the charms of
your country," said Brasidas to a Satrap, who was comparing the life at
Sparta with that at Persepolis, "but you cannot know the pleasures of
mine."

An unbroken horse erects his mane, paws the ground and starts back
impetuously at the sight of the bridle; while one which is properly
trained suffers patiently even whip and spur: so savage man will not
bend his neck to the yoke to which civilised man submits without a
murmur, but prefers the most turbulent state of liberty to the most
peaceful slavery. We cannot therefore, from the servility of nations
already enslaved, judge of the natural disposition of mankind for
or against slavery; we should go by the prodigious efforts of every
free people to save itself from oppression. I know that the former
are for ever holding forth in praise of the tranquillity they enjoy
in their chains, and that they call a state of wretched servitude a
state of peace: _miserrimam servitutem pacem appellant_.[6] But when
I observe the latter sacrificing pleasure, peace, wealth, power and
life itself to the preservation of that one treasure, which is so
disdained by those who have lost it; when I see free-born animals
dash their brains out against the bars of their cage, from an innate
impatience of captivity; when I behold numbers of naked savages, that
despise European pleasures, braving hunger, fire, the sword and death,
to preserve nothing but their independence, I feel that it is not for
slaves to argue about liberty.

With regard to paternal authority, from which some writers have derived
absolute government and all society, it is enough, without going back
to the contrary arguments of Locke and Sidney, to remark that nothing
on earth can be further from the ferocious spirit of despotism than the
mildness of that authority which looks more to the advantage of him who
obeys than to that of him who commands; that, by the law of nature, the
father is the child's master no longer than his help is necessary; that
from that time they are both equal, the son being perfectly independent
of the father, and owing him only respect and not obedience. For
gratitude is a duty which ought to be paid, but not a right to be
exacted: instead of saying that civil society is derived from paternal
authority, we ought to say rather that the latter derives its principal
force from the former. No individual was ever acknowledged as the
father of many, till his sons and daughters remained settled around
him. The goods of the father, of which he is really the master, are
the ties which keep his children in dependence, and he may bestow on
them, if he pleases, no share of his property, unless they merit it by
constant deference to his will. But the subjects of an arbitrary despot
are so far from having the like favour to expect from their chief,
that they themselves and everything they possess are his property, or
at least are considered by him as such; so that they are forced to
receive, as a favour, the little of their own he is pleased to leave
them. When he despoils them, he does but justice, and mercy in that he
permits them to live.

By proceeding thus to test fact by right, we should discover as little
reason as truth in the voluntary establishment of tyranny. It would
also be no easy matter to prove the validity of a contract binding on
only one of the parties, where all the risk is on one side, and none on
the other; so that no one could suffer but he who bound himself. This
hateful system is indeed, even in modern times, very far from being
that of wise and good monarchs, and especially of the kings of France;
as may be seen from several passages in their edicts; particularly from
the following passage in a celebrated edict published in 1667 in the
name and by order of Louis XIV.

"Let it not, therefore, be said that the Sovereign is not subject
to the laws of his State; since the contrary is a true proposition
of the right of nations, which flattery has sometimes attacked but
good princes have always defended as the tutelary divinity of their
dominions. How much more legitimate is it to say with the wise Plato,
that the perfect felicity of a kingdom consists in the obedience of
subjects to their prince, and of the prince to the laws, and in the
laws being just and constantly directed to the public good!"[7]

I shall not stay here to inquire whether, as liberty is the noblest
faculty of man, it is not degrading our very nature, reducing ourselves
to the level of the brutes, which are mere slaves of instinct, and even
an affront to the Author of our being, to renounce without reserve
the most precious of all His gifts, and to bow to the necessity
of committing all the crimes He has forbidden, merely to gratify a
mad or a cruel master; or if this sublime craftsman ought not to be
less angered at seeing His workmanship entirely destroyed than thus
dishonoured. I will waive (if my opponents please) the authority of
Barbeyrac, who, following Locke, roundly declares that no man can so
far sell his liberty as to submit to an arbitrary power which may
use him as it likes. _For_, he adds, _this would be to sell his own
life, of which he is not master_. I shall ask only what right those
who were not afraid thus to debase themselves could have to subject
their posterity to the same ignominy, and to renounce for them those
blessings which they do not owe to the liberality of their progenitors,
and without which life itself must be a burden to all who are worthy of
it.

Puffendorf says that we may divest ourselves of our liberty in favour
of other men, just as we transfer our property from one to another by
contracts and agreements. But this seems a very weak argument. For in
the first place, the property I alienate becomes quite foreign to me,
nor can I suffer from the abuse of it; but it very nearly concerns me
that my liberty should not be abused, and I cannot without incurring
the guilt of the crimes I may be compelled to commit, expose myself
to become an instrument of crime. Besides, the right of property
being only a convention of human institution, men may dispose of
what they possess as they please: but this is not the case with the
essential gifts of nature, such as life and liberty, which every man is
permitted to enjoy, and of which it is at least doubtful whether any
have a right to divest themselves. By giving up the one, we degrade
our being; by giving up the other, we do our best to annul it; and,
as no temporal good can indemnify us for the loss of either, it would
be an offence against both reason and nature to renounce them at any
price whatsoever. But, even if we could transfer our liberty, as we
do our property, there would be a great difference with regard to the
children, who enjoy the father's substance only by the transmission of
his right; whereas, liberty being a gift which they hold from nature
as being men, their parents have no right whatever to deprive them of
it. As then, to establish slavery, it was necessary to do violence to
nature, so, in order to perpetuate such a right, nature would have to
be changed. Jurists, who have gravely determined that the child of a
slave comes into the world a slave, have decided, in other words, that
a man shall come into the world not a man.

I regard it then as certain, that government did not begin with
arbitrary power, but that this is the depravation, the extreme term,
of government, and brings it back, finally, to just the law of the
strongest, which it was originally designed to remedy. Supposing,
however, it had begun in this manner, such power, being in itself
illegitimate, could not have served as a basis for the laws of society,
nor, consequently, for the inequality they instituted.

Without entering at present upon the investigations which still remain
to be made into the nature of the fundamental compact underlying
all government, I content myself with adopting the common opinion
concerning it, and regard the establishment of the political body as
a real contract between the people and the chiefs chosen by them: a
contract by which both parties bind themselves to observe the laws
therein expressed, which form the ties of their union. The people
having in respect of their social relations concentrated all their
wills in one, the several articles, concerning which this will is
explained, become so many fundamental laws, obligatory on all the
members of the State without exception, and one of these articles
regulates the choice and power of the magistrates appointed to watch
over the execution of the rest. This power extends to everything which
may maintain the constitution, without going so far as to alter it.
It is accompanied by honours, in order to bring the laws and their
administrators into respect. The ministers are also distinguished by
personal prerogatives, in order to recompense them for the cares and
labour which good administration involves. The magistrate, on his side,
binds himself to use the power he is entrusted with only in conformity
with the intention of his constituents, to maintain them all in the
peaceable possession of what belongs to them, and to prefer on every
occasion the public interest to his own.

Before experience had shown, or knowledge of the human heart enabled
men to foresee, the unavoidable abuses of such a constitution, it must
have appeared so much the more excellent, as those who were charged
with the care of its preservation had themselves most interest in it;
for magistracy and the rights attaching to it being based solely on
the fundamental laws, the magistrates would cease to be legitimate as
soon as these ceased to exist; the people would no longer owe them
obedience; and as not the magistrates, but the laws, are essential to
the being of a State, the members of it would regain the right to their
natural liberty.

If we reflect with ever so little attention on this subject, we shall
find new arguments to confirm this truth, and be convinced from the
very nature of the contract that it cannot be irrevocable: for, if
there were no superior power capable of ensuring the fidelity of the
contracting parties, or compelling them to perform their reciprocal
engagements, the parties would be sole judges in their own cause, and
each would always have a right to renounce the contract, as soon as he
found that the other had violated its terms, or that they no longer
suited his convenience. It is upon this principle that the right of
abdication may possibly be founded. Now, if, as here, we consider
only what is human in this institution, it is certain that, if the
magistrate, who has all the power in his own hands, and appropriates
to himself all the advantages of the contract, has none the less a
right to renounce his authority, the people, who suffer for all the
faults of their chief, must have a much better right to renounce their
dependence. But the terrible and innumerable quarrels and disorders
that would necessarily arise from so dangerous a privilege, show,
more than anything else, how much human governments stood in need of
a more solid basis than mere reason, and how expedient it was for the
public tranquillity that the divine will should interpose to invest the
sovereign authority with a sacred and inviolable character, which might
deprive subjects of the fatal right of disposing of it. If the world
had received no other advantages from religion, this would be enough to
impose on men the duty of adopting and cultivating it, abuses and all,
since it has been the means of saving more blood than fanaticism has
ever spilt. But let us follow the thread of our hypothesis.

The different forms of government owe their origin to the differing
degrees of inequality which existed between individuals at the time
of their institution. If there happened to be any one man among them
pre-eminent in power, virtue, riches or personal influence, he became
sole magistrate, and the State assumed the form of monarchy. If
several, nearly equal in point of eminence, stood above the rest, they
were elected jointly, and formed an aristocracy. Again, among a people
who had deviated less from a state of nature, and between whose fortune
or talents there was less disproportion, the supreme administration was
retained in common, and a democracy was formed. It was discovered in
process of time which of these forms suited men the best. Some peoples
remained altogether subject to the laws; others soon came to obey their
magistrates. The citizens laboured to preserve their liberty; the
subjects, irritated at seeing others enjoying a blessing they had lost,
thought only of making slaves of their neighbours. In a word, on the
one side arose riches and conquests, and on the other happiness and I
virtue.

In these different governments, all the offices were at first elective;
and when the influence of wealth was out of the question, the
preference was given to merit, which gives a natural ascendancy, and
to age, which is experienced in business and deliberate in council.
The Elders of the Hebrews, the Gerontes at Sparta, the Senate at Rome,
and the very etymology of our word Seigneur, show how old age was once
held in veneration. But the more often the choice fell upon old men,
the more often elections had to be repeated, and the more they became
a nuisance; intrigues set in, factions were formed, party feeling
grew--bitter, civil wars broke out; the lives of individuals were
sacrificed to the pretended happiness of the State; and at length men
were on the point of relapsing into their primitive anarchy. Ambitious
chiefs profited by these circumstances to perpetuate their offices
in their own families: at the same time the people, already used to
dependence, ease, and the conveniences of life, and already incapable
of breaking its fetters, agreed to an increase of its slavery, in order
to secure its tranquillity. Thus magistrates, having become hereditary,
contracted the habit of considering their offices as a family estate,
and themselves as proprietors of the communities of which they were at
first only the officers, of regarding their fellow-citizens as their
slaves, and numbering them, like cattle, among their belongings, and of
calling themselves the equals of the gods and longs of kings.

If we follow the progress of inequality in these various revolutions,
we shall find that the establishment of laws and of the right of
property was its first term, the institution of magistracy the second,
and the conversion of legitimate into arbitrary power the third and
last; so that the condition of rich and poor was authorised by the
first period; that of powerful and weak by the second; and only by the
third that of master and slave, which is the last degree of inequality,
and the term at which all the rest remain, when they have got so far,
till the government is either entirely dissolved by new revolutions, or
brought back again to legitimacy.

To understand this progress as necessary we must consider not so much
the motives for the establishment of the body politic, as the forms
it assumes in actuality, and the faults that necessarily attend it:
for the flaws which make social institutions necessary are the same
as make the abuse of them unavoidable. If we except Sparta, where
the laws were mainly concerned with the education of children, and
where Lycurgus established such morality as practically made laws
needless--for laws as a rule, being weaker than the passions, restrain
men without altering them--it would not be difficult to prove that
every government, which scrupulously complied with the ends for which
it was instituted, and guarded carefully against change and corruption,
was set up unnecessarily. For a country, in which no one either evaded
the laws or made a bad use of magisterial power, could require neither
laws nor magistrates.

Political distinctions necessarily produce civil distinctions. The
growing equality between the chiefs and the people is soon felt by
individuals, and modified in a thousand ways according to passions,
talents and circumstances. The magistrate could not usurp any
illegitimate power, without giving distinction to the creatures with
whom he must share it. Besides, individuals only allow themselves
to be oppressed so far as they are hurried on by blind ambition,
and, looking rather below than above them, come to love authority
more than independence, and submit to slavery, that they may in turn
enslave others. It is no easy matter to reduce to obedience a man
who has no ambition to command; nor would the most adroit politician
find it possible to enslave a people whose only desire was to be
independent. But inequality easily makes its way among cowardly and
ambitious minds, which are ever ready to run the risks of fortune, and
almost indifferent whether they command or obey, as it is favourable
or adverse. Thus, there must have been; a time, when the eyes of the
people were so fascinated, that their rulers had only to say to the
least of men, "Be great, you and all your posterity," to make him
immediately appear great in the eyes of every one as well as in his
own. His descendants took still more upon them, in proportion to their
distance from him; the more obscure; and uncertain the cause, the
greater the effect: the greater--the number of idlers one could count
in a family, the more illustrious it was held to be.

If this were the place to go into details, I could readily explain
how, even without the intervention of government, inequality of
credit and authority became unavoidable among private persons, as
soon as their union in a single society made them compare themselves
one with another, and take into account the differences which they
found out from the continual intercourse every man had to have with
his neighbours.[8] These differences are of several kinds; but
riches, nobility or rank, power and personal merit being the principal
distinctions by which men form an estimate of each other in society,
I could prove that the harmony or conflict of these different forces
is the surest indication of the good or bad constitution of a State.
I could show that among these four kinds of inequality, personal
qualities being the origin of all the others, wealth is the one to
which they are all reduced in the end; for, as riches tend most
immediately to the prosperity of individuals, and are easiest to
communicate, they are used to purchase every other distinction. By this
observation we are enabled to judge pretty exactly how far a people
has departed from its primitive constitution, and of its progress
towards the extreme term of corruption. I could explain how much
this universal desire for reputation, honours and advancement, which
inflames us all, exercises and holds up to comparison our faculties and
powers; how it excites and multiplies our passions, and, by creating
universal competition and rivalry, or rather enmity, among men,
occasions numberless failures, successes and disturbances of all kinds
by making so many aspirants run the same course. I could show that it
is to this desire of being talked about, and this unremitting rage of
distinguishing ourselves, that we owe the best and the worst things we
possess, both our virtues and our vices, our science and our errors,
our conquerors and our philosophers; that is to say, a great many bad
things, and a very few good ones. In a word, I could prove that, if
we have a few rich and powerful men on the pinnacle of fortune and
grandeur, while the crowd grovels in want and obscurity, it is because
the former prize what they enjoy only in so far as others are destitute
of it; and because, without changing their condition, they would cease
to be happy the moment the people ceased to be wretched.

These details alone, however, would furnish matter for a considerable
work, in which the advantages and disadvantages of every kind of
government might be weighed, as they are related to man in the state
of nature, and at the same time all the different aspects, under which
inequality has up to the present appeared, or may appear in ages yet
to come, according to the nature of the several governments, and the
alterations which time must unavoidably occasion in them, might be
demonstrated. We should then see the multitude oppressed from within,
in consequence of the very precautions it had taken to guard against
foreign tyranny. We should see oppression continually gain ground
without it being possible for the oppressed to know where it would
stop, or what legitimate means was left them of checking its progress.
We should see the rights of citizens, and the freedom of nations
slowly extinguished, and the complaints, protests and appeals of the
weak treated as seditious murmurings. We should see the honour of
defending the common cause confined by statecraft to a mercenary part
of the people. We should see taxes made necessary by such means, and
the disheartened husbandman deserting his fields even in the midst of
peace, and leaving the plough to gird on the sword. We should see fatal
and capricious codes of honour established; and the champions of their
country sooner or later becoming its enemies, and for ever holding
their daggers to the breasts of their fellow-citizens. The time would
come when they would be heard saying to the oppressor of their country--

_Pectore si fratris gladium juguloque parentis_
_Condere me jubeas, gravidæque in viscera partu_
_Conjugis, invitâ peragam tamen omnia dextrâ._
                                   Lucan. i, 376.

From great inequality of fortunes and conditions, from the vast variety
of passions and of talents, of useless and pernicious arts, of vain
sciences, would arise a multitude of prejudices equally contrary to
reason, happiness and virtue. We should see the magistrates fomenting
everything that might weaken men united in society, by promoting
dissension among them; everything that might sow in it the seeds of
actual division, while it gave society the air of harmony; everything
that might inspire the different ranks of people with mutual hatred and
distrust, by setting the rights and interests of one against those of
another, and so strengthen the power which comprehended them all.

It is from the midst of this disorder and these revolutions, that
despotism, gradually raising up its hideous head and devouring
everything that remained sound and untainted in any part of the State,
would at length trample on both the laws and the people, and establish
itself on the ruins of the republic. The times which immediately
preceded this last change would be times of trouble and calamity; but
at length the monster would swallow up everything, and the people would
no longer have either chiefs or laws, but only tyrants. From this
moment there would be no question of virtue or morality; for despotism
_cui ex honesto nulla est spes_, wherever it prevails, admits no other
master; it no sooner speaks than probity and duty lose their weight and
blind obedience is the only virtue which slaves can still practise.

This is the last term of inequality, the extreme points that closes
the circle, and meets that from which we set out. Here all private
persons return to their first equality, because they are nothing; and,
subjects having no law but the will of their master, and their master
no restraint but his passions, all notions of good and all principles
of equity again vanish. There is here a complete return to the law of
the strongest, and so to a new state of nature, differing from that we
set out from; for the one was a state of nature in its first purity,
while this is the consequence of excessive corruption. There is so
little difference between the two states in other respects, and the
contract of government is so completely dissolved by despotism, that
the despot is master only so long as he remains the strongest; as soon
as he can be expelled, he has no right to complain of violence. The
popular insurrection that ends in the death or deposition of a Sultan
is as lawful an act as those by which he disposed, the day before, of
the lives and fortunes of his subjects. As he was maintained by force
alone, it is force alone that overthrows him. Thus everything takes
place according to the natural order; and, whatever may be the result
of such frequent and precipitate revolutions, no one man has reason to
complain of the injustice of another, but only of his own ill-fortune
or indiscretion.

If the reader thus discovers and retraces the lost and forgotten road,
by which man must have passed from the state of nature to the state
of society; if he carefully restores, along with the intermediate
situations which I have just described, those which want of time has
compelled me to suppress, or my imagination has failed to suggest,
he cannot fail to be struck by the vast distance which separates the
two states. It is in tracing this slow succession that he will find
the solution of a number of problems of politics and morals, which
philosophers cannot settle. He will feel that, men being different in
different ages, the reason why Diogenes could not find a man was that
he sought among his contemporaries a man of an earlier period. He will
see that Cato died with Rome and liberty, because he did not fit the
age in which he lived; the greatest of men served only to astonish a
world which he would certainly have ruled, had he lived five hundred
years sooner. In a word, he will explain how the soul and the passions
of men insensibly change their very nature; why our wants and pleasures
in the end seek new objects; and why, the original man having vanished
by degrees, society offers to us only an assembly of artificial men and
factitious passions, which are the work of all these new relations, and
without any real foundation in nature. We are taught nothing on this
subject, by reflection, that is not entirely confirmed by observation.
The savage and the civilised man differ so much in the bottom of
their hearts and in their inclinations, that what constitutes the
supreme happiness of one would reduce the other to despair. The former
breathes only peace and liberty; he desires only to live and be free
from labour; even the _ataraxia_ of the Stoic falls far short of his
profound indifference to every other object. Civilised man, on the
other hand, is always moving, sweating, toiling and racking his brains
to find still more laborious occupations: he goes on in drudgery to his
last moment, and even seeks death to put himself in a position to live,
or renounces life to acquire immortality. He pays his court to men in
power, whom he hates, and to the wealthy, whom he despises; he stops at
nothing to have the honour of serving them; he is not ashamed to value
himself on his own meanness and their protection; and, proud of his
slavery, he speaks with disdain of those, who have not the honour of
sharing it. What a sight would the perplexing and envied labours of a
European minister of State present to the eyes of a Caribean! How many
cruel deaths would not this indolent savage prefer to the horrors of
such a life, which is seldom even sweetened by the pleasure of doing
good! But, for him to see into the motives of all this solicitude, the
words _power_ and _reputation_, would have to bear some meaning in his
mind; he would have to know that there are men who set a value on the
opinion of the rest of the world; who can be made happy and satisfied
with themselves rather on the testimony of other people than on their
own. In reality, the source, of all these differences is, that the
savage lives within himself, while social man lives constantly outside
himself, and only knows how to live in the opinion of others, so that
he seems to receive the consciousness of his own existence merely
from the judgment of others concerning him. It is not to my present
purpose to insist on the indifference to good and evil which arises
from this disposition, in spite of our many fine works on morality,
or to show how, everything being reduced to appearances, there is but
art and mummery in even honour, friendship, virtue, and often vice
itself, of which we at length learn the secret of boasting; to show,
in short, how, always asking others what, we are, and never daring
to ask ourselves, in the midst of so much philosophy, humanity and
civilisation, and of such sublime codes of morality, we have nothing
to show for ourselves but a frivolous and deceitful appearance, honour
without virtue, reason without wisdom, and pleasure without happiness.
It is sufficient that I have proved that this is not by any means the
original state of man, but that it is merely the spirit of society, and
the inequality which society produces, that thus transform and alter
all our natural inclinations.

I have endeavoured to trace the origin and progress of inequality, and
the institution and abuse of political societies, as far as these are
capable of being deduced from the nature of man merely by the light
of reason, and independently of those sacred dogmas which give the
sanction of divine right to sovereign authority. It follows from this
survey that, as there is hardly any inequality in the state of nature,
all the inequality which now prevails owes its strength and growth to
the development of our faculties and the advance of the human mind,
and becomes at last permanent and legitimate by the establishment
of property and laws. Secondly, it follows that moral inequality
authorised by positive right alone, clashes with natural right,
whenever it is not proportionate to physical inequality; a distinction
which sufficiently determines what we ought to think of that species
of inequality which prevails in all civilised countries; since it is
plainly contrary to the law of nature, however defined, that children
should command old men, fools wise men, and that the privileged
few should gorge themselves with superfluities, while the starving
multitude are in want of the bare necessities of life.


[5] Ovid, Metamorphoses xi, 127.

Both rich and poor, shocked at their new-found ills, Would fly from
wealth, and lose what they had sought.


[6] Tacitus, Hist. iv, 17. The most wretched slavery they call peace.

[7] Of the Rights of the Most Christian Queen over various States of
the Monarchy of Spain, 1667.

[8] Distributive justice would oppose this rigorous equality of the
state of nature, even were it practicable in civil society; as all
the members of the State owe it their services in proportion to their
talents and abilities, they ought, on their side, to be distinguished
and favoured in proportion to the services they have actually rendered.
It is in this sense we must understand that passage of Isocrates, in
which he extols the primitive Athenians, for having determined which
of the two kinds of equality was the most useful, viz. that which
consists in dividing the same advantages indiscriminately among all the
citizens, or that which consists in distributing them to each according
to his deserts. These able politicians, adds the orator, banishing
that unjust inequality which makes no distinction between good and bad
men, adhered inviolably to that which rewards and punishes every man
according to his deserts.

But in the first place, there never existed a society, however corrupt
some may have become, where no difference was made between the good
and the bad; and with regard to morality, where no measures can be
prescribed by law exact enough to serve as a practical rule for a
magistrate, it is with great prudence that, in order not to leave the
fortune or quality of the citizens to his discretion, it prohibits him
from passing judgment on persons and confines his judgment to actions.
Only morals such as those of the ancient Romans can bear censors, and
such a tribunal among us would throw everything into confusion. The
difference between good and bad men is determined by public esteem; the
magistrate being strictly a judge of right alone; whereas the public is
the truest judge of morals, and is of such integrity and penetration on
this head, that although it may be sometimes deceived, it can never be
corrupted. The rank of citizens ought, therefore, to be regulated, not
according to their personal merit--for this would put it in the power
of the magistrate to apply the law almost arbitrarily--but according to
the actual services done to the State, which are capable of being more
exactly estimated.




APPENDIX[1]


A famous author, reckoning up the good and evil of human life, and
comparing the aggregates, finds that our pains greatly exceed our
pleasures: so that, all things considered, human life is not at all a
valuable gift. This conclusion does not surprise me; for the writer
drew all his arguments from man in civilisation. Had he gone back to
the state of nature, his inquiries would clearly have had a different
result, and man would have been seen to be subject to very few evils
not of his own creation. It has indeed cost us not a little trouble
to make ourselves as wretched as we are. When we consider, on the one
hand, the immense labours of mankind, the many sciences brought to
perfection, the arts invented, the powers employed, the deeps filled
up, the mountains levelled, the rocks shattered, the rivers made
navigable, the tracts of land cleared, the lakes emptied, the marshes
drained, the enormous structures erected on land, and the teeming
vessels that cover the sea; and, on the other hand, estimate with ever
so little thought, the real advantages that have accrued from all these
works to mankind, we cannot help being amazed at the vast disproportion
there is between these things, and deploring the infatuation of man,
which, to gratify his silly pride and vain self-admiration, induces him
eagerly to pursue all the miseries he is capable of feeling, though
beneficent nature had kindly placed them out of his way.

That men are actually wicked, a sad and continual experience of them
proves beyond doubt: but all the same, I think I've shown that man is
naturally good. What then can have depraved him to such an extent,
except the changes that have happened in his constitution, the advances
he has made, and the knowledge he has acquired? We may admire human
society as much as we please; it will be none the less true that it
necessarily leads men to hate each other in proportion as their
interests clash, and to do one another apparent services, while they
are really doing every imaginable mischief. What can be thought of a
relation, in which the interest of every individual dictates rules
directly opposite to those the public reason dictates to the community
in general--in which every man finds his profit in the misfortunes of
his neighbour? There is not perhaps any man in a comfortable position
who has not greedy heirs, and perhaps even children, secretly wishing
for his death; not a ship at sea, of which the loss would not be good
news to some merchant or other; not a house, which some debtor of bad
faith would not be glad to see reduced to ashes with all the papers
it contains; not a nation which does not rejoice at the disasters
that befall its neighbours. Thus it is that we find our advantage in
the misfortunes of our fellow-creatures, and that the loss of one man
almost always constitutes the prosperity of another. But it is still
more pernicious that public calamities are the objects of the hopes and
expectations of innumerable individuals. Some desire sickness, some
mortality, some war, and some famine. I have seen men wicked enough to
weep for sorrow at the prospect of a plentiful season; and the great
and fatal fire of London, which cost so many unhappy persons their
lives or their fortunes, made the fortunes of perhaps ten thousand
others. I know that Montaigne; censures Demades the Athenian for having
caused to be I punished a workman who, by selling his coffins very
dear, was a great gainer by the deaths of his fellow-citizens; but, the
reason alleged by Montaigne being that everybody ought to be punished,
my point is clearly confirmed by it. Let us penetrate, therefore, the
superficial appearances of benevolence, and survey what passes in the
inmost recesses of the heart. Let us reflect what must be the state of
things, when men are forced to caress and destroy one another at the
same time; when they are born enemies by duty, and knaves by interest.
It will perhaps be said that society is so formed that every man gains
by serving the rest. That would be all very well, if he did not gain
still more by injuring them. There is no legitimate profit so great,
that it cannot be greatly exceeded by what may be made illegitimately;
we always gain more by hurting our neighbours than by doing them good.
Nothing is required but to know how to act with impunity; and to this
end the powerful employ all their strength, and the weak all their
cunning.

Savage man, when he has dined, is at peace with all nature, and the
friend of all his fellow-creatures. If a dispute arises about a meal,
he rarely comes to blows, without having first compared the difficulty
of conquering his antagonist with the trouble of finding subsistence
elsewhere: and, as pride does not come in, it all ends in a few blows;
the victor eats, and the vanquished seeks provision somewhere else,
and all is at peace. The case is quite different with man in the
state of society, for whom first necessaries have to be provided, and
then superfluities; delicacies follow next, then immense wealth, then
subjects, and then slaves. He enjoys not a moments relaxation; and what
is yet stranger, the less natural and pressing his wants, the more
headstrong are his passions, and, still worse, the more he has it in
his power to gratify them; so that after a long course of prosperity,
after having swallowed up treasures and ruined multitudes, the hero
ends up by cutting every throat till he finds himself, at last, sole
master of the world. Such is in miniature the moral picture, if not
of human life, at least of the secret pretensions of the heart of
civilised man.

Compare without partiality the state of the citizen with that of the
savage, and trace out, if you can, how many inlets the former has
opened to pain and death, besides those of his vices, his wants and his
misfortunes. If you reflect on the mental afflictions that prey on us,
the violent passions that waste and exhaust us, the excessive labour
with which the poor are burdened, the still more dangerous indolence
to which the wealthy give themselves up, so that the poor perish of
want, and the rich of surfeit; if you reflect but a moment on the
heterogeneous mixtures and pernicious seasonings of foods; the corrupt
state in which they are frequently eaten; on the adulteration of
medicines, the wiles of those who sell them, the mistakes of those who
administer them, and the poisonous vessels in which they are prepared;
on the epidemics bred by foul air in consequence of great numbers of
men being crowded together, or those which are caused by our delicate
way of living, by our passing from our houses into the open air and
back again, by the putting on or throwing off our clothes with too
little care, and by all the precautions which sensuality has converted
into necessary habits, and the neglect of which sometimes costs us
our life or health; if you take into account the conflagrations and
earthquakes, which, devouring or overwhelming whole cities, destroy
the inhabitants by thousands; in a word, if you add together all the
dangers with which these causes are always threatening us, you will
see how dearly nature makes us pay for the contempt with which we have
treated her lessons.

I shall not here repeat, what I have elsewhere said of the calamities
of war; but wish that those, who have sufficient knowledge, were
willing or bold enough to make public the details of the villainies
committed in armies by the contractors for commissariat, and hospitals:
we should see plainly that their monstrous frauds, already none too
well concealed, which cripple the finest armies in less than no time,
occasion greater destruction among the soldiers than the swords of the
enemy.

The number of people who perish annually at sea, by famine, the scurvy,
pirates, fire and shipwrecks, affords matter for another shocking
calculation. We must also place to the credit of the establishment
of property, and consequently to the institution of society,
assassinations, poisonings, highway robberies, and even the punishments
inflicted on the wretches guilty of these crimes; which, though
expedient to prevent greater evils, yet by making the murder of one man
cost the lives of two or more, double the loss to the human race.

What shameful methods are sometimes practised to prevent the birth of
men, and cheat nature; either by brutal and depraved appetites which
insult her most beautiful work--appetites unknown to savages or mere
animals, which can spring only from the corrupt imagination of mankind
in civilised countries; or by secret abortions, the fitting effects
of debauchery and vitiated notions of honour; or by the exposure or
murder of multitudes of infants, who fall victims to the poverty of
their parents, or the cruel shame of their mothers; or, finally, by
the mutilation of unhappy wretches, part of whose life, with their
hope of posterity, is given up to vain singing, or, still worse, the
brutal jealousy of other men: a mutilation which, in the last case,
becomes a double outrage against nature from the treatment of those
who suffer it, and from the use to which they are destined. But is
it not a thousand times more common and more dangerous for paternal
rights openly to offend against humanity? How many talents have not
been thrown away, and inclinations forced, by the unwise constraint of
fathers? How many men, who would have distinguished themselves in a
fitting estate, have died dishonoured and wretched in another for which
they had no taste! How many happy, but unequal, marriages have been
broken or disturbed, and how many chaste wives have been dishonoured,
by an order of things continually in contradiction with that of nature!
How many good and virtuous husbands and wives are reciprocally punished
for having been ill-assorted! How many young and unhappy victims of
their parents' avarice plunge into vice, or pass their melancholy
days in tears, groaning in the indissoluble bonds which their hearts
repudiate and gold alone has formed! Fortunate sometimes are those
whose courage and virtue remove them from life before inhuman violence
makes them spend it in crime or in despair. Forgive me, father and
mother, whom I shall ever regret: my complaint embitters your griefs;
but would they might be an eternal and terrible example to every one
who dares, in the name of nature, to violate her most sacred right.

If I have spoken only of those ill-starred unions which are the
result of our system, is it to be thought that those over which love
and sympathy preside are free from disadvantages? What if I should
undertake to show humanity attacked in its very source, and even in
the most sacred of all ties, in which fortune is consulted before
nature, and, the disorders of society confounding all virtue and vice,
continence becomes a criminal precaution, and a refusal to give life
to a fellow-creature, an act of humanity? But, without drawing aside
the veil which hides all these horrors, let us content ourselves with
pointing out the evil which others will have to remedy.

To all this add the multiplicity of unhealthy trades, which shorten
men's lives or destroy their bodies, such as working in the mines,
and the preparing of metals and minerals, particularly lead, copper,
mercury, cobalt, and arsenic: add those other dangerous trades which
are daily fatal to many tilers, carpenters, masons and miners: put all
these together and we can see, in the establishment and perfection of
societies, the reasons for that diminution of our species, which has
been noticed by many philosophers.

Luxury, which cannot be prevented among men who are tenacious of their
own convenience and of the respect paid them by others, soon completes
the evil society had begun, and, under the pretence of giving bread to
the poor, whom it should never have made such, impoverishes all the
rest, and sooner or later depopulates the State. Luxury is a remedy
much worse than the disease it sets up to cure; or rather it is in
itself the greatest of all evils, for every State, great or small:
for, in order to maintain all the servants and vagabonds it creates,
it brings oppression and ruin on the citizen and the labourer; it is
like those scorching winds, which, covering the trees and plants with
devouring insects, deprive useful animals of their subsistence and
spread famine and death wherever they blow.

From society and the luxury to which it gives birth arise the liberal
and mechanical arts, commerce, letters, and all those superfluities
which make industry flourish, and enrich and ruin nations. The reason
for such destruction is plain. It is easy to see, from the very nature
of agriculture, that it must be the least lucrative of all the arts;
for, its produce being the most universally necessary, the price must
be proportionate to the abilities of the very poorest of mankind.

From the same principle may be deduced this rule, that the arts in
general are more lucrative in proportion as they are less useful; and
that, in the end, the most useful becomes the most neglected. From this
we may learn what to think of the real advantages of industry and the
actual effects of its progress.

Such are the sensible causes of all the miseries, into which opulence
at length plunges the most celebrated nations. In proportion as arts
and industry flourish, the despised husbandman, burdened with the
taxes necessary for the support of luxury, and condemned to pass his
days between labour and hunger, forsakes his native field, to seek in
towns the bread he ought to carry thither. The more our capital cities
strike the vulgar eye with admiration, the greater reason is there to
lament the sight of the abandoned countryside, the large tracts of land
that lie uncultivated, the roads crowded with unfortunate citizens
turned beggars or highwaymen, and doomed to end their wretched lives
either on a dunghill or on the gallows. Thus the State grows rich on
the one hand, and feeble and depopulated on the other; the mightiest
monarchies, after having taken immense pains to enrich and depopulate
themselves, fall at last a prey to some poor nation, which has yielded
to the fatal temptation of invading them, and then, growing opulent and
weak in its turn, is itself invaded and ruined by some other.

Let any one inform us what produced the swarms of barbarians, who
overran Europe, Asia and Africa for so many ages. Was their prodigious
increase due to their industry and arts, to the wisdom of their laws,
or to the excellence of their political system? Let the learned tell us
why, instead of multiplying to such a degree, these fierce and brutal
men, without sense or science, without education, without restraint,
did not destroy each other hourly in quarrelling over the productions
of their fields and woods. Let them tell us how these wretches could
have the presumption to oppose such clever people as we were, so well
trained in military discipline, and possessed of such excellent laws
and institutions: and why, since society has been brought to perfection
in northern countries, and so much pains taken to instruct their
inhabitants in their social duties and in the art of living happily
and peaceably together, we see them no longer produce such numberless
hosts as they used once to send forth to be the plague and terror of
other nations. I fear some one may at last answer me by saying, that
all these fine things, arts, sciences and laws, were wisely invented by
men, as a salutary plague, to prevent the too great multiplication of
mankind, lest the world, which was given us for a habitation, should in
time be too small for its inhabitants.

What, then, is to be done? Must societies be totally abolished? Must
_meum_ and _tuum_ be annihilated, and must we return again to the
forests to live among beasts? This is a deduction in the manner of
my adversaries, which I would as soon anticipate as let them have the
shame of drawing. O you, who have never heard the voice of heaven,
who think man destined only to live this little life and die in
peace; you, who can resign in the midst of populous cities your fatal
acquisitions, your restless spirits, your corrupt hearts and endless
desires; resume, since it depends entirely on yourselves, your ancient
and primitive innocence: retire to the woods, there to lose the sight
and remembrance of the crimes of your contemporaries; and be not
apprehensive of degrading your species, by renouncing its advances in
order to renounce its vices. As for men like me whose passions have
destroyed their original simplicity, who can no longer subsist on
plants or acorns, or live without laws and magistrates those who were
honoured in their first father with supernatural instructions; those
who discover, in the design of giving human actions at the start a
morality which they must otherwise have been so long in acquiring, the
reason for a precept in itself indifferent and inexplicable on every
other system; those, in short, who are persuaded that the Divine Being
has called all mankind to be partakers in the happiness and perfection
of celestial intelligences, all these will endeavour to merit the
eternal prize they are to expect from the practice of those virtues,
which they make themselves follow in learning to know them. They will
respect the sacred bonds of their respective communities; they will
love theft fellow-citizens, and serve them with all their might: they
will scrupulously obey the laws, and all those who make or administer
them; they will particularly honour those wise and good princes, who
find means of preventing, curing or even palliating all these evils and
abuses, by which we are constantly threatened; they will animate the
zeal of their deserving rulers, by showing them, without flattery or
fear, the importance of their office and the severity of their duty.
But they will not therefore have less contempt for a constitution that
cannot support itself without the aid of so many splendid characters,
much oftener wished for than found; and from which, notwithstanding all
their pains and solicitude, there always arise more real calamities
than even apparent advantages.


[1] See "the faculty of self-improvement".




A DISCOURSE ON POLITICAL ECONOMY



The word Economy, or Oeconomy, is derived from [Greek: _oikos_], _a
house_, and [Greek: _nomos_], _law_, and meant originally only the wise
and legitimate government of the house for the common good of the whole
family. The meaning of the term was then extended to the government of
that great family, the State. To distinguish these two senses of the
word, the latter is called _general_ or _political_ economy, and the
former domestic or particular economy. The first only is discussed in
the present discourse.

Even if there were as close an analogy as many authors maintain between
the State and the family, it would not follow that the rules of conduct
proper for one of these societies would be also proper for the other.
They differ too much in extent to be regulated in the same manner; and
there will always be a great difference between domestic government, in
which a father can see everything for himself, and civil government,
where the chief sees hardly anything save through the eyes of others.
To put both on an equality in this respect, the talents, strength, and
all the faculties of the father would have to increase in proportion to
the size of his family, and the soul of a powerful monarch would have
to be, to that of an ordinary man, as the extent of his empire is to
that of a private person's estate.

But how could the government of the State be like that of the family,
when the basis on which they rest is so different? The father being
physically stronger than his children, his paternal authority, as long
as they need his protection, may be reasonably said to be established
by nature. But in the great family, all the members of which are
naturally equal, the political authority, being purely arbitrary as far
as its institution is concerned, can be founded only on conventions,
and the Magistrate can have no authority over the rest, except by
virtue of the laws. The duties of a father are dictated to him by
natural feelings, and in a manner that seldom allows him to neglect
them. For rulers there is no such principle, and they are really
obliged to the people only by what they themselves have promised to
do, and the people have therefore a right to require of them. Another
more important difference is that since the children have nothing but
what they receive from their father, it is plain that all the rights
of property belong to him, or emanate from him; but quite the opposite
is the case in the great family, where the general administration is
established only to secure individual property, which is antecedent to
it. The principal object of the work of the whole house is to preserve
and increase the patrimony of the father, in order that he may be able
some day to distribute it among his children without impoverishing
them; whereas the wealth of the exchequer is only a means, often ill
understood, of keeping the individuals in peace and plenty. In a word,
the little family is destined to be extinguished, and to resolve itself
some day into several families of a similar nature; but the great
family, being constituted to endure for ever in the same condition,
need not, like the small one, increase for the purpose of multiplying,
but need only maintain itself; and it can easily be proved that any
increase does it more harm than good.

In the family, it is clear, for several reasons which lie in its very
nature, that the father ought to command. In the first place, the
authority ought not to be equally divided between father and mother;
the government must be single, and in every division of opinion there
must be one preponderant voice to decide. Secondly, however lightly
we may regard the disadvantages peculiar to women, yet, as they
necessarily occasion intervals of inaction, this is a sufficient reason
for excluding them from this supreme authority: for when the balance
is perfectly even, a straw is enough to turn the scale. Besides, the
husband ought to be able to superintend his wife's conduct, because
it is of importance for him to be assured that the children, whom he
is obliged to acknowledge and maintain, belong to no-one but himself.
Thirdly, children should be obedient to their father, at first of
necessity, and afterwards from gratitude: after having had their
wants satisfied by him during one half of their lives, they ought to
consecrate the other half to providing for his. Fourthly, servants owe
him their services in exchange for the provision he makes for them,
though they may break off the bargain as soon as it ceases to suit
them. I say nothing here of slavery, because it is contrary to nature,
and cannot be authorised by any right or law.

There is nothing of all this in political society, in which the chief
is so far from having any natural interest in the happiness of the
individuals, that it is not uncommon for him to seek his own in their
misery. If the magistracy is hereditary, a community of men is often
governed by a child. If it be elective, innumerable inconveniences
arise from such election; while in both cases all the advantages of
paternity are lost. If you have but a single ruler, you lie at the
discretion of a master who has no reason to love you: and if you have
several, you must bear at once their tyranny and their divisions. In
a word, abuses are inevitable and their consequences fatal in every
society where the public interest and the laws have no natural force,
and are perpetually attacked by personal interest and the passions of
the ruler and the members.

Although the functions of the father of a family and those of the
chief magistrate ought to make for the same object, they must do so
in such different ways, and their duty and rights are so essentially
distinct, that we cannot confound them without forming very false ideas
about the fundamental laws of society, and falling into errors which
are fatal to mankind. In fact, if the voice of nature is the best
counsellor to which a father can listen in the discharge of his duty,
for the Magistrate it is a false guide, which continually prevents him
from performing his, and leads him on sooner or later to the ruin of
himself and of the State, if he is not restrained by the most sublime
virtue. The only precaution necessary for the father of a family is to
guard himself against depravity, and prevent his natural inclinations
from being corrupted; whereas it is these themselves which corrupt the
Magistrate. In order to act aright, the first has only to consult his
heart; the other becomes a traitor the moment he listens to his. Even
his own reason should be suspect to him, nor should he follow any rule
other than the public reason, which is the law. Thus nature has made
a multitude of good fathers of families; but it is doubtful whether,
from the very beginning of the world, human wisdom has made ten men
capable of governing their peers.

From all that has just been said, it follows that _public_ economy,
which is my subject, has been rightly distinguished from _private_
economy, and that, the State having nothing in common with the family
except the obligations which their heads lie under of making both
of them happy, the same rules of conduct cannot apply to both. I
have considered these few lines enough to overthrow the detestable
system which Sir Robert Filmer has endeavoured to establish in his
_Patriarcha_; a work to which two celebrated writers have done too much
honour in writing books to refute it. Moreover, this error is of very
long standing; for Aristotle himself thought proper to combat it with
arguments which may be found in the first book of his _Politics_.

I must here ask my readers to distinguish also between _public
economy_, which is my subject and which I call _government_, and the
supreme authority, which I call _Sovereignty_; a distinction which
consists in the fact that the latter has the right of legislation, and
in certain cases binds the body of the nation itself, while the former
has only the right of execution, and is binding only on individuals.

I shall take the liberty of making use of a very common, and in some
respects inaccurate, comparison, which will serve to illustrate my
meaning.

The body politic, taken individually, may be considered as an
organised, living body, resembling that of man. The sovereign power
represents the head; the laws and customs are the brain, the source
of the nerves and seat of the understanding, will and senses, of
which the Judges and Magistrates are the organs: commerce, industry,
and agriculture are the mouth and stomach which prepare the common
subsistence; the public income is the blood, which a prudent _economy_,
in performing the functions of the heart, causes to distribute through
the whole body nutriment and life: the citizens are the body and the
members, which make the machine live, move and work; and no part of
this machine can be damaged without the painful impression being at
once conveyed to the brain, if the animal is in a state of health.

The life of both bodies is the self common to the whole, the reciprocal
sensibility and internal correspondence of all the parts. Where this
communication ceases, where the formal unity disappears, and the
contiguous parts belong to one another only by juxtaposition, the man
is dead, or the State is dissolved.

The body politic, therefore, is also a moral being possessed of a will;
and this general will, which tends always to the preservation and
welfare of the whole and of every part, and is the source of the laws,
constitutes for all the members of the State, in their relations to one
another and to it, the rule of what is just or unjust: a truth which
shows, by the way, how idly some writers have treated as theft the
subtlety prescribed to children at Sparta for obtaining their frugal
repasts, as if everything ordained by the law were not lawful.

It is important to observe that this rule of justice, though certain
with regard to all citizens, may be defective with regard to
foreigners. The reason is clear. The will of the State, though general
in relation to its own members, is no longer so in relation to other
States and their members, but becomes, for them, a particular and
individual will, which has its rule of justice in the law of nature.
This, however, enters equally into the principle here laid down;
for in such a case, the great city of the world becomes the body
politic, whose general will is always the law of nature, and of which
the different States and peoples are individual members. From these
distinctions, applied to each political society and its members, are
derived the most certain and universal rules, by which we can judge
whether a government is good or bad, and in general of the morality of
all human actions.

Every political society is composed of other smaller societies of
different kinds, each of which has its interests and its rules of
conduct: but those societies which everybody perceives, because they
have an external and authorised form, are not the only ones that
actually exist in the State: all individuals who are united by a common
interest compose as many others, either transitory or permanent, whose
influence is none the less real because it is less apparent, and the
proper observation of whose various relations is the true knowledge of
public morals and manners. The influence of all these tacit or formal
associations causes, by the influence of their will, as many different
modifications of the public will. The will of these particular
societies has always two relations; for the members of the association,
it is a general will; for the great society, it is a particular will;
and it is often right with regard to the first object, and wrong as to
the second. An individual may be a devout priest, a brave soldier, or a
zealous senator, and yet a bad citizen. A particular resolution may be
advantageous to the smaller community, but pernicious to the greater.
It is true that particular societies being always subordinate to the
general society in preference to others, the duty of a citizen takes
precedence of that of a senator, and a man's duty of that of a citizen:
but unhappily personal interest is always found in inverse ratio to
duty, and increases in proportion as the association grows narrower,
and the engagement less sacred; which irrefragably proves that the most
general will is always the must just also, and that the voice of the
people is in fact the voice of God.

It does not follow that the public decisions are always equitable;
they may possibly, for reasons which I have given, not be so when they
have to do with foreigners. Thus it is not impossible that a Republic,
though in itself well governed, should enter upon an unjust war. Nor
is it less possible for the Council of a Democracy to pass unjust
decrees, and condemn the innocent; but this never happens unless the
people is seduced by private interests, which the credit or eloquence
of some clever persons substitutes for those of the State; in which
case the general will will be one thing, and the result of the public
deliberation another. This is not contradicted by the case of the
Athenian Democracy; for Athens was in fact not a Democracy, but a
very tyrannical Aristocracy, governed by philosophers and orators.
Carefully determine what happens in every public deliberation, and it
will be seen that the general will is always for the common good; but
very often there is a secret division, a tacit confederacy, which, for
particular ends, causes the natural disposition of the assembly to be
set at nought. In such a case the body of society is really divided
into other bodies, the members of which acquire a general will, which
is good and just with respect to these new bodies, but unjust and bad
with regard to the whole, from which each is thus dismembered.

We see then how easy it is, by the help of these principles, to explain
those apparent contradictions, which are noticed in the conduct of
many persons who are scrupulously honest in some respects, and cheats
and scoundrels in others, who trample under foot the most sacred
duties, and yet are faithful to the death to engagements that are often
illegitimate. Thus the most depraved of men always pay some sort of
homage to public faith; and even robbers, who are the enemies of virtue
in the great society, pay some respect to the shadow of it in their
secret caves.

In establishing the general will as the first principle of public
_economy_, and the fundamental rule of government, I have not thought
it necessary to inquire seriously whether the Magistrates belong to the
people, or the people to the Magistrates; or whether in public affairs
the good of the State should be taken into account, or only that of
its rulers. That question indeed has long been decided one way in
theory, and another in practice; and in general it would be ridiculous
to expect that those who are in fact masters will prefer any other
interest to their own. It would not be improper, therefore, further to
distinguish public _economy_ as popular or tyrannical. The former is
that of every State, in which there reigns between the people and the
rulers unity of interest and will: the latter will necessarily exist
wherever the government and the people have different interests, and,
consequently, opposing wills. The rules of the latter are written at
length in the archives of history, and in the satires of Macchiavelli.
The rules of the former are found only in the writings of those
philosophers who venture to proclaim the rights of humanity.

I. The first and most important rule of legitimate or popular
government, that is to say, of government whose object is the good of
the people, is therefore, as I have observed, to follow in everything
the general will. But to follow this will it is necessary to know it,
and above all to distinguish it from the particular will, beginning
with one's self: this distinction is always very difficult to make,
and only the most sublime virtue can afford sufficient illumination
for it. As, in order to will, it is necessary to be free, a difficulty
no less great than the former arises--that of preserving at once the
public liberty and the authority of government. Look into the motives
which have induced men, once united by their common needs in a general
society, to unite themselves still more intimately by means of civil
societies: you will find no other motive than that of assuring the
property, life and liberty of each member by the protection of all.
But can men be forced to defend the liberty of any one among them,
without trespassing on that of others? And how can they provide for
the public needs, without alienating the individual property of those
who are forced to contribute to them? With whatever sophistry all this
may be covered over, it is certain that if any constraint can be laid
on my will, I am no longer free, and that I am no longer master of my
own property, if any one else can lay a hand on it. This difficulty,
which would have seemed insurmountable, has been removed, like the
first, by the most sublime of all human institutions, or rather by a
divine inspiration, which teaches mankind to imitate here below the
unchangeable decrees of the Deity. By what inconceivable art has a
means been found of making men free by making them subject; of using in
the service of the State the properties, the persons and even the lives
of all its members, without constraining and without consulting them;
of confining their will by their own admission; of overcoming their
refusal by that consent, and forcing them to punish themselves, when
they act against their own will? How can it be that all should obey,
yet nobody take upon him to command, and that all should serve, and
yet have no masters, but be the more free, as, in apparent subjection,
each loses no part of his liberty but what might be hurtful; to that of
another? These wonders are the work of law. It is to law alone that men
owe justice and liberty. It is this salutary organ of the will of all
which establishes, in civil right, the natural equality between men.
It is this celestial voice which dictates to each citizen the precepts
of public reason, and teaches him to act according to the rules of his
own judgment, and not to behave inconsistently with himself. It is with
this voice alone that political rulers should speak when they command;
for no sooner does one man, setting aside the law, claim to subject
another to his private will, than he departs from the state of civil
society, and confronts him face to face in the pure state of nature, in
which obedience is prescribed solely by necessity.

The most pressing interest of the ruler, and even his most
indispensable duty, therefore, is to watch over the observation of the
laws of which he is the minister, and on which his whole authority is
founded. At the same time, if he exacts the observance of them from
others, he is the more strongly bound to observe them himself, since he
enjoys all their favour. For his example is of such force, that even if
the people were willing to permit him to release himself from the yoke
of the law, he ought to be cautious in availing himself of so dangerous
a prerogative, which others might soon claim to usurp in their turn,
and often use to his prejudice. At bottom, as all social engagements
are mutual in nature, it is impossible for any one to set himself above
the law, without renouncing its advantages; for nobody is bound by any
obligation to one who claims that he is under no obligations to others.
For this reason no exemption from the law will ever be granted, on any
ground whatsoever, in a well-regulated government. Those citizens who
have deserved well of their country ought to be rewarded with honours,
but never with privileges: for the Republic is at the eve of its fall,
when any one can think it fine not to obey the laws. If the nobility or
the soldiery should ever adopt such a maxim, all would be lost beyond
redemption.

The power of the laws depends still more on their own wisdom than on
the severity of their administrators, and the public will derives its
greatest weight from the reason which has dictated it. Hence Plato
looked upon it as a very necessary precaution to place at the head of
all edicts a preamble, setting forth their justice and utility. In
fact, the first of all laws is to respect the laws: the severity of
penalties is only a vain resource, invented by little minds in order
to substitute terror for that respect which they have no means of
obtaining. It has constantly been observed that in those countries
where legal punishments are most severe, they are also most frequent;
so that the cruelty of such punishments is a proof only of the
multitude of criminals, and, punishing everything with equal severity,
induces those who are guilty to commit crimes, in order to escape being
punished for their faults.

But though the government be not master of the law, it is much to be
its guarantor, and to possess a thousand means of inspiring the love
of it. In this alone the talent of reigning consists. With force in
one's hands, there is no art required to make the whole world tremble,
nor indeed much to gain men's hearts; for experience has long since
taught the people to give its rulers great credit for all the evil they
abstain from doing it, and to adore them if they do not absolutely hate
it. A fool, if he be obeyed, may punish crimes as well as another: but
the true statesman is he who knows how to prevent them: it is over the
wills, even more than the actions, of his subjects that his honourable
rule is extended. If he could secure that every one should act aright,
he would no longer have anything to do; and the masterpiece of his
labours would be to be able to remain unemployed. It is certain, at
least, that the greatest talent a ruler can possess is to disguise his
power, in order to render it less odious, and to conduct the State so
peaceably as to make it seem to have no need of conductors.

I conclude, therefore, that, as the first duty of the legislator is to
make the laws conformable to the general will, the first rule of public
_economy_ is that the administration of justice should be conformable
to the laws. It will even be enough to prevent the State from being ill
governed, that the Legislator shall have provided, as he should, for
every need of place, climate, soil, custom, neighbourhood, and all the
rest of the relations peculiar to the people he had to institute. Not
but what there still remains an infinity of details of administration
and economy, which are left to the wisdom of the government: but there
are two infallible rules for its good conduct on these occasions; one
is, that the spirit of the law ought to decide in every particular
case that could not be foreseen; the other is that the general will,
the source and supplement of all laws, should be consulted wherever
they fail. But how, I shall be asked, can the general will be known
in cases in which it has not expressed itself? Must the whole nation
be assembled together at every unforeseen event? Certainly not. It
ought the less to be assembled, because it is by no means certain that
its decision would be the expression of the general will; besides, the
method would be impracticable in a great people, and is hardly ever
necessary where the government is well-intentioned: for the rulers
well know that the general will is always on the side which is most
favourable to the public interest, that is to say, most equitable; so
that it is needful only to act justly, to be certain of following the
general will. When this is flouted too openly, it makes itself felt, in
spite of the formidable restraint of the public authority. I shall cite
the nearest possible examples that may be followed in such cases.

In China, it is the constant maxim of the Prince to decide against his
officers, in every dispute that arises between them and the people.
If bread be too dear in any province, the Intendant of that province
is thrown into prison. If there be an insurrection in another, the
Governor is dismissed, and every Mandarin answers with his head for all
the mischief that happens in his department. Not that these affairs do
not subsequently undergo a regular examination; but long experience
has caused the judgment to be thus anticipated. There is seldom any
injustice to be repaired; in the meantime, the Emperor, being satisfied
that public outcry does not arise without cause, always discovers,
through the seditious clamours which he punishes, just grievances to
redress.

It is a great thing to preserve the rule of peace and order through all
the parts of the Republic; it is a great thing that the State should
be tranquil, and the law respected: but if nothing more is done, there
will be in all this more appearance than reality; for that government
which confines itself to mere obedience will find difficulty in getting
itself obeyed. If it is good to know how to deal with men as they are,
it is much better to make them what there is need that they should
be. The most absolute authority is that which penetrates into a man's
inmost being, and concerns itself no less with his will than with
his actions. It is certain that all peoples become in the long run
what the government makes them; warriors, citizens, men, when it so
pleases; or merely populace and rabble, when it chooses to make them
so. Hence every prince who despises his subjects, dishonours himself,
in confessing that he does not know how to make them worthy of respect.
Make men, therefore, if you would command men: if you would have them
obedient to the laws, make them love the laws, and then they will need
only to know what is their duty to do it. This was the great art of
ancient governments, in those distant times when philosophers gave laws
to men, and made use of their authority only to render them wise and
happy. Thence arose the numerous sumptuary laws, the many regulations
of morals, and all the public rules of conduct which were admitted
or rejected with the greatest care. Even tyrants did not forget this
important part of administration, but took as great pains to corrupt
the morals of their slaves, as Magistrates took to correct those of
their fellow-citizens. But our modern governments, which imagine they
have done everything when they have raised money, conceive that it is
unnecessary and even impossible to go a step further.

II. The second essential rule of public economy is no less important
than the first. If you would have the general will accomplished, bring
all the particular wills into conformity with it; in other words, as
virtue is nothing more than this conformity of the particular wills
with the general will, establish the reign of virtue.

If our politicians were less blinded by their ambition, they would
see how impossible it is for any establishment whatever to act in
the spirit of its institution, unless it is guided in accordance
with the law of duty; they would feel that the greatest support of
public authority lies in the hearts of the citizens, and that nothing
can take the place of morality in the maintenance of government. It
is not only upright men who know how to administer the laws; but at
bottom only good men know how to obey them. The man who once gets the
better of remorse, will not shrink before punishments which are less
severe, and less lasting, and from which there is at least the hope
of escaping: whatever precautions are taken, those who only require
impunity in order to do wrong will not fail to find means of eluding
the law, and avoiding its penalties. In this case, as all particular
interests unite against the general interest, which is no longer that
of any individual, public vices have a greater effect in enervating
the laws than the laws in the repression of such vices: so that the
corruption of the people and of their rulers will at length extend to
the government, however wise it may be. The worst of all abuses is
to pay an apparent obedience to the laws, only in order actually to
break them with security. For in this case the best laws soon become
the most pernicious; and it would be a hundred times better that
they should not exist. In such a situation, it is vain to add edicts
to edicts and regulations to regulations. Everything serves only to
introduce new abuses, without correcting the old. The more laws are
multiplied, the more they are despised, and all the new officials
appointed to supervise them are only so many more people to break
them, and either to share the plunder with their predecessors, or to
plunder apart on their own. The reward of virtue soon becomes that of
robbery; the vilest of men rise to the greatest credit; the greater
they are the more despicable they become; their infamy appears even in
their dignities, and their very honours dishonour them. If they buy
the influence of the leaders or the protection of women, it is only
that they may sell justice, duty, and the State in their turn: in the
meantime, the people, feeling that its vices are not the first cause of
its misfortunes, murmurs and complains that all its misfortunes come
solely from those whom it pays to protect it from such things.

It is under these circumstances that the voice of duty no longer speaks
in men's hearts, and their rulers are obliged to substitute the cry of
terror, or the lure of an apparent interest, of which they subsequently
trick their creatures. In this situation they are compelled to have
recourse to all the petty and despicable shifts which they call _rules
of State_ and _mysteries of the cabinet_. All the vigour that is left
in the government is used by its members in ruining and supplanting one
another, while the public business is neglected, or is transacted only
as personal interest requires and directs. In short, the whole art of
those great politicians lies in so mesmerising those they stand in need
of, that each may think he is labouring for his own interest in working
for theirs: I say _theirs_ on the false supposition that it is the real
interest of rulers to annihilate a people in order to make it subject,
and to; ruin their own property in order to secure their possession of
it.

But when the citizens love their duty, and the guardians of the public
authority sincerely apply themselves to the fostering of that love
by their own example and assiduity, every difficulty vanishes; and
government becomes so easy that it needs none of that art of darkness,
whose blackness is its only mystery. Those enterprising spirits,
so dangerous and so much admired, all those great ministers, whose
glory is inseparable from the miseries of the people, are no longer
regretted: public morality supplies what is wanting in the genius of
the rulers; and the more virtue reigns, the less need there is for
talent. Even ambition is better served by duty than by usurpation:
when the people is convinced that its rulers are labouring only for
its happiness, its deference saves them the trouble of labouring to
strengthen their power: and history shows us, in a thousand cases,
that the authority of one who is beloved over those whom he loves is
a hundred times more absolute than all the tyranny of usurpers. This
does not mean that the government ought to be afraid to make use of its
power, but that it ought to make use of it only in a lawful manner.
We find in history a thousand examples of pusillanimous or ambitious
rulers, who were ruined by their slackness or their pride; not one who
suffered for having been strictly just. But we ought not to confound
negligence with moderation, or clemency with weakness. To be just, it
is necessary to be severe; to permit vice, when one has the right and
the power to suppress it, is to be oneself vicious.

It is not enough to say to the citizens, _be good_; they must be
taught to be so; and even example, which is in this respect the first
lesson, is not the sole means to be employed; patriotism is the most
efficacious: for, as I have said already, every man is virtuous when
his particular will is in all things conformable to the general will,
and we voluntarily will what is willed by those whom we love. It
appears that the feeling of humanity evaporates and grows feeble in
embracing all mankind, and that we cannot be affected by the calamities
of Tartary or Japan, in the same manner as we are by those of European
nations. It is necessary in some degree to confine and limit our
interest and compassion in order to make it active. Now, as this
sentiment can be useful only to those with whom we have to live, it is
proper that our humanity should confine itself to our fellow-citizens,
and should receive a new force because we are in the habit of seeing
them, and by reason of the common interest which unites them. It is
certain that the greatest miracles of virtue have been produced by
patriotism: this fine and lively feeling, which gives to the force of
self-love all the beauty of virtue, lends it an energy which, without
disfiguring it, makes it the most heroic of all passions. This it is
that produces so many immortal actions, the glory of which dazzles our
feeble eyes; and so many great men, whose old-world virtues pass for
fables now that patriotism is made mock of. This is not surprising;
the transports of susceptible hearts appear altogether fanciful to any
one who has never felt them; and the love of one's country, which is a
hundred times more lively and delightful than the love of a mistress,
cannot be conceived except by experiencing it. But it is easy to
perceive in every heart that is warmed by it, in all the actions it
inspires, a glowing and sublime ardour which does not attend the purest
virtue, when separated from it. Contrast Socrates even with Cato; the
one was the greater philosopher, the other more of the citizen. Athens
was already ruined in the time of Socrates, and he had no other country
than the world at large. Cato had the cause of his country always at
heart; he lived for it alone, and could not bear to outlive it. The
virtue of Socrates was that of the wisest of men; but, compared with
Cæsar and Pompey, Cato seems a God among mortals. Socrates instructed
a few individuals, opposed the Sophists, and died for truth: but Cato
defended his country, its liberty and its laws, against the conquerors
of the world, and at length departed from the earth, when he had no
longer a country to serve. A worthy pupil of Socrates would be the most
virtuous of his contemporaries; but a worthy follower of Cato would be
one of the greatest. The virtue of the former would be his happiness;
the latter would seek his happiness in that of all. We should be taught
by the one, and led by the other; and this alone is enough to determine
which to prefer: for no people has ever been made into a nation of
philosophers, but it is not impossible to make a people happy.

Do we wish men to be virtuous? Then let us begin by making them love
their country: but how can they love it, if their country be nothing
more to them than to strangers, and afford them nothing but what it
can refuse nobody? It would be still worse, if they did not enjoy even
the privilege of social security, and if their lives, liberties and
property lay at the mercy of persons in power, without their being
permitted, or it being possible for them, to get relief from the laws.
For in that case, being subjected to the duties of the state of civil
society, without enjoying even the common privileges of the state of
nature, and without being able to use their strength in their own
defence, they would be in the worst, condition in which freemen could
possibly find themselves, and the word _country_ would mean for them
something merely odious and ridiculous. It must not be imagined that a
man can break or lose an arm, without the pain being conveyed to his
head: nor is it any more credible that the general will should consent
that any one member of the State, whoever he might be, should wound or
destroy another, than it is that the fingers of a man in his senses
should wilfully scratch his eyes out. The security of individuals is so
intimately connected with the public confederation that, apart from the
regard that must be paid to human weakness, that convention would in
point of right be dissolved, if in the State a single citizen who might
have been relieved were allowed to perish, or if one were wrongfully
confined in prison, or if in one case an obviously unjust sentence were
given. For the fundamental conventions being broken, it is impossible
to conceive of any right or interest that could retain the people in
the social union; unless they were restrained by force, which alone
causes the dissolution of the state of civil society.

In fact, does not the undertaking entered into by the whole body of the
nation bind it to provide for the security of the least of its members
with as much care as for that of all the rest? Is the welfare of a
single citizen any less the common cause than that of the whole State?
It may be said that it is good that one should perish for all. I am
ready to admire such a saying when it comes from the lips of a virtuous
and worthy patriot, voluntarily and dutifully sacrificing himself for
the good of his country: but if we are to understand by it, that it
is lawful for the government to sacrifice an innocent man for the good
of the multitude, I look upon it as one of the most execrable rules
tyranny ever invented, the greatest falsehood that can be advanced, the
most dangerous admission that can be made, and a direct contradiction
of the fundamental laws of society. So little is it the case that any
one person ought to perish for all, that all have pledged their lives
and properties for the defence of each, in order that the weakness of
individuals may always be protected by the strength of the public, and
each member by the whole State. Suppose we take from the whole people
one individual after another, and then press the advocates of this rule
to explain more exactly what they mean by the _body of the State_, and
we shall see that it will at length be reduced to a small number of
persons, who are not the people, but the officers of the people, and
who, having bound themselves by personal oath to perish for the welfare
of the people, would thence infer that the people is to perish for
their own.

Need we look for examples of the protection which the State owes to its
members, and the respect it owes to their persons? It is only among
the most illustrious and courageous nations that they are to be found;
it is only among free peoples that the dignity of man is realised. It
is well known into what perplexity the whole republic of Sparta was
thrown, when the question of punishing a guilty citizen arose.

In Macedon, the life of a man was a matter of such importance, that
Alexander the Great, at the height of his glory, would not have dared
to put a Macedonian criminal to death in cold blood, till the accused
had appeared to make his defence before his fellow-citizens, and had
been condemned by them. But the Romans distinguished themselves above
all other peoples by the regard which their government paid to the
individual, and by its scrupulous attention to the preservation of
the inviolable rights of all the members of the State. Nothing was
so sacred among them as the life of a citizen; and no less than an
assembly of the whole people was needed to condemn one. Not even the
Senate, nor the Consuls, in all their majesty, possessed the right;
but the crime and punishment of a citizen were regarded as a public
calamity among the most powerful people in the world. So hard indeed
did it seem to shed blood for any crime whatsoever, that by the Lex
Porcia, the penalty of death was commuted into that of banishment for
all those who were willing to survive the loss of so great a country.
Everything both at Rome, and in the Roman armies, breathed that love of
fellow-citizens one for another, and that respect for the Roman name,
which raised the courage and inspired the virtue of every one who had
the honour to bear it. The cap of a citizen delivered from slavery,
the civic crown of him who had saved the life of another, were looked
upon with the greatest pleasure amid the pomp of their triumphs; and
it is remarkable that among the crowns which were bestowed in honour
of splendid actions in war, the civic crown and that of the triumphant
general alone were of laurel, all the others being merely of gold. It
was thus that Rome was virtuous and became the mistress of the world.
Ambitious rulers! A herdsman governs his dogs and cattle, and yet is
only the meanest of mankind. If it be a fine thing to command, it is
when those who obey us are capable of doing us honour. Show respect,
therefore, to your fellow-citizens, and you will render yourselves
worthy of respect; show respect to liberty, and your power will
increase daily. Never exceed your rights, and they will soon become
unlimited.

Let our country then show itself the common mother of her citizens; let
the advantages they enjoy in their country endear it to them; let the
government leave them enough share in the public administration to make
them feel that they are at home; and let the laws be in their eyes only
the guarantees of the common liberty. These rights, great as they are,
belong to all men: but without seeming to attack them directly, the
ill-will of rulers may in fact easily reduce their effect to nothing.
The law, which they thus abuse, serves the powerful at once as a weapon
of offence, and as a shield against the weak; and the pretext of the
public good is always the most dangerous scourge of the people. What
is most necessary, and perhaps most difficult, in government, is rigid
integrity in doing strict justice to all, and above all in protecting
the poor against the tyranny of the rich. The greatest evil has
already come about, when there are poor men to be defended, and rich
men to be restrained. It is on the middle classes alone that the whole
force of the law is exerted; they are equally powerless against the
treasures of the rich and the penury of the poor. The first mocks them,
the second escapes them. The one breaks the meshes, the other passes
through them.

It is therefore one of the most important functions of government to
prevent extreme inequality of fortunes; not by taking away wealth from
its possessors, but by depriving all men of means to accumulate it;
not by building hospitals for the poor, but by securing the citizens
from becoming poor. The unequal distribution of inhabitants over the
territory, when men are crowded together in one place, while other
places are depopulated; the encouragement of the arts that minister
to luxury and of purely industrial arts at the expense of useful
and laborious crafts; the sacrifice of agriculture to commerce; the
necessitation of the tax-farmer by the mal-administration of the funds
of the State; and in short, venality pushed to such an extreme that
even public esteem is reckoned at a cash value, and virtue rated at
a market price: these are the most obvious causes of opulence and
of poverty, of public interest, of mutual hatred among citizens, of
indifference to the common cause, of the corruption of the people, and
of the weakening of all the springs of government. Such are the evils,
which are with difficulty cured when they make themselves felt, but
which a wise administration ought to prevent, if it is to maintain,
along with good morals, respect for the laws, patriotism, and the
influence of the general will.

But all these precautions will be inadequate, unless rulers go still
more to the root of the matter. I conclude this part of public economy
where I ought to have begun it. There can be no patriotism without
liberty, no liberty without virtue, no virtue without citizens; create
citizens, and you have everything you need; without them, you will have
nothing but debased slaves, from the rulers of the State downwards. To
form citizens is not the work of a day; and in order to have men it
is necessary to educate them when they are children. It will be said,
perhaps, that whoever has men to govern, ought not to seek, beyond
their nature, a perfection of which they are incapable; that he ought
not to desire to destroy their passions; and that the execution of such
an attempt is no more desirable than it is possible. I will agree,
further, that a man without passions would certainly be a bad citizen;
but it must be agreed also that, if men are not taught not to love
some things, it is impossible to teach them to love one object more
than another--to prefer that which is truly beautiful to that which is
deformed. If, for example, they were early accustomed to regard their
individuality only in its relation to the body of the State, and to be
aware, so to speak, of their own existence merely as a part of that of
the State, they might at length come to identify themselves in some
degree with this greater whole, to feel themselves members of their
country, and to love it with that exquisite feeling which no isolated
person has save for himself; to lift up their spirits perpetually to
this great object, and thus to transform into a sublime virtue that
dangerous disposition which gives rise to all our vices. Not only does
philosophy demonstrate the possibility of giving feeling these new
directions; history furnishes us with a thousand striking examples.
If they are so rare among us moderns, it is because nobody troubles
himself whether citizens exist or not, and still less does anybody
think of attending to the matter soon enough to make them. It is too
late to change our natural inclinations, when they have taken their
course, and egoism is confirmed by habit: it is too late to lead us
out of ourselves when once the human Ego, concentrated in our hearts,
has acquired that contemptible activity which absorbs all virtue and
constitutes the life and being of little minds. How can, patriotism
germinate in the midst of so many other passions which smother it?
And what can remain, for fellow-citizens, of a heart already divided
between avarice, a mistress, and vanity?

From the first moment of life, men ought to begin learning to deserve
to live; and, as at the instant of birth we partake of the rights of
citizenship, that instant ought to be the beginning of the exercise of
our duty. If there are laws for the age of maturity, there ought to be
laws for infancy, teaching obedience to others: and as the reason of
each man is not left to be the sole arbiter of his duties, government
ought the less indiscriminately to abandon to the intelligence and
prejudices of fathers the education of their children, as that
education is of still greater importance to the State than to the
fathers: for, according to the course of nature, the death of the
father often deprives him of the final fruits of education; but his
country sooner or later perceives its effects. Families dissolve, but
the State remains.

Should the public authority, by taking the place of the father, and
charging itself with that important function, acquire his rights by
discharging his duties, he would have the less cause to complain, as
he would only be changing his title, and would have in common, under
the name of _citizen_, the same authority over his children, as he was
exercising separately under the name of _father_, and would not be less
obeyed when speaking in the name of the law, than when he spoke in that
of nature. Public education, therefore, under regulations prescribed
by the government, and under magistrates established by the Sovereign,
is one of the fundamental rules of popular or legitimate government.
If children are brought up in common in the bosom of equality; if they
are imbued with the laws of the State and the precepts of the general
will; if they are taught to respect these above all things; if they
are surrounded by examples and objects which constantly remind them of
the tender mother who nourishes them, of the love she bears them, of
the inestimable benefits they receive from her, and of the return they
owe her, we cannot doubt that they will learn to cherish one another
mutually as brothers, to will nothing contrary to the will of society,
to substitute the actions of men and citizens for the futile and vain
babbling of sophists, and to become in time defenders and fathers of
the country of which they will have been so long the children.

I shall say nothing of the Magistrates destined to preside over such
an education, which is certainly the most important business of the
State. It is easy to see that if such marks of public confidence
were conferred on slight grounds, if this sublime function were not,
for those who have worthily discharged all other offices, the reward
of labour, the pleasant and honourable repose of old age, and the
crown of all honours, the whole enterprise would be useless and the
education void of success. For where-ever the lesson is not supported
by authority, and the precept by example, all instruction is fruitless;
and virtue itself loses its credit in the mouth of one who does not
practise it. But let illustrious warriors, bent under the weight of
their laurels, preach courage: let upright Magistrates, grown white
in the purple and on the bench teach justice. Such teachers as these
would thus get themselves virtuous successors, and transmit from age to
age, to generations to come, the experience and talents of rulers, the
courage and virtue of citizens, and common emulation in all to live and
die for their country.

I know of but three peoples which once practised public education, the
Cretans, the Lacedæmonians, and the ancient Persians: among all these
it was attended with the greatest success, and indeed it did wonders
among the two last. Since the world has been divided into nations too
great to admit of being well governed, this method has been no longer
practicable, and the reader will readily perceive other reasons why
such a thing has never been attempted by any modern people. It is very
remarkable that the Romans were able to dispense with it; but Rome was
for five hundred years one continued miracle which the world cannot
hope to see again. The virtue of the Romans, engendered by their horror
of tyranny and the crimes of tyrants, and by an innate patriotism, made
all their houses so many schools of citizenship; while the unlimited
power of fathers over their children made the individual authority so
rigid that the father was more feared than the Magistrate, and was in
his family tribunal both censor of morals and avenger of the laws.

Thus a careful and well-intentioned government, vigilant incessantly to
maintain or restore patriotism and morality among the people, provides
beforehand against the evils which sooner or later result from the
indifference of the citizens to the fate of the Republic, keeping
within narrow bounds that personal interest which so isolates the
individual that the State is enfeebled by his power, and has nothing
to hope from his good-will. Wherever men love their country, respect
the laws, and live simply, little remains to be done in order to make
them happy; and in public administration, where chance has less
influence than in the lot of individuals, wisdom is so nearly allied to
happiness, that the two objects are confounded.

III. It is not enough to have citizens and to protect them, it is also
necessary to consider their subsistence. Provision for the public wants
is an obvious inference from the general will, and the third essential
duty of government. This duty is not, we should feel, to fill the
granaries of individuals and thereby to grant them a dispensation from
labour, but to keep plenty so within their reach that labour is always
necessary and never useless for its acquisition. It extends also to
everything regarding the management of the exchequer, and the expenses
of public administration. Having thus treated of general economy with
reference to the government of persons, we must now consider it with
reference to the administration of property.

This part presents no fewer difficulties to solve, and contradictions
to remove, than the preceding. It is certain that the right of property
is the most sacred of all the rights of citizenship, and even more
important in some respects than liberty itself; either because it more
nearly affects the preservation of life, or because, property being
more easily usurped and more difficult to defend than life, the law
ought to pay a greater attention to what is most easily taken away; or
finally, because property is the true foundation of civil society, and
the real guarantee of the undertakings of citizens: for if property
were not answerable for personal actions, nothing would be easier
than to evade duties and laugh at the laws. On the other hand, it is
no less certain that the maintenance of the State and the government
involves costs and out-goings; and as every one who agrees to the end
must acquiesce in the means, it follows that the members of a society
ought to contribute from their property to its support. Besides, it is
difficult to secure the property of individuals on one side, without
attacking it on another; and it is impossible that all the regulations
which govern the order of succession, will, contracts, &c. should not
lay individuals under some constraint as to the disposition of their
goods, and should not consequently restrict the right of property.

But besides what I have said above of the agreement between the
authority of law and the liberty of the citizen, there remains to
be made, with respect to the disposition of goods, an important
observation which removes many difficulties. As Puffendorf has shown,
the right of property, by its very nature, does not extend beyond the
life of the proprietor, and the moment a man is dead his goods cease
to belong to him. Thus, to prescribe the conditions according to which
he can dispose of them, is in reality less to alter his right as it
appears, than to extend it in fact.

In general, although the institution of the laws which regulate the
power of individuals in the disposition of their own goods belongs only
to the Sovereign, the spirit of these laws, which the government ought
to follow in their application, is that, from father to son, and from
relation to relation, the goods of a family should go as little out of
it and be as little alienated as possible. There is a sensible reason
for this in favour of children, to whom the right of property would be
quite useless, if the father left them nothing, and who besides, having
often contributed by their labour to the acquisition of their father's
wealth, are in their own right associates with him in his right of
property. But another reason, more distant, though not less important,
is that nothing is more fatal to morality and to the Republic than the
continual shifting of rank and fortune among the citizens: such changes
are both the proof and the source of a thousand disorders, and overturn
and confound everything; for those who were brought up to one thing
find themselves destined for another; and neither those who rise nor
those who fall are able to assume the rules of conduct, or to possess
themselves of the qualifications requisite for their new condition,
still less to discharge the duties it entails. I proceed to the object
of public finance.

If the people governed itself and there were no intermediary between
the administration of the State and the citizens, they would have no
more to do than to assess themselves occasionally, in proportion to
the public needs and the abilities of individuals: and as they would
all keep in sight the recovery and employment of such assessments, no
fraud or abuse could slip into the management of them; the State would
never be involved in debt, or the people over-burdened with taxes;
or at least the knowledge of how the money would be used would be a
consolation For the severity of the tax. But things cannot be carried
an in this manner: on the contrary, however small any State may be,
civil societies are always too populous to be under the immediate
government of all their members. It is necessary that the public money
should go through the hands of the rulers, all of whom have, besides
the interests of the State, their own individual interests, which are
not the last to be listened to. The people, on its side, perceiving
rather the cupidity and ridiculous expenditure of its rulers than the
public needs, murmurs at seeing itself stripped of necessaries to
furnish others with superfluities; and when once these complaints have
reached a certain degree of bitterness, the most upright administration
will find it impossible to restore confidence. In such a case,
voluntary contributions bring in nothing, and forced contributions
are illegitimate. This cruel alternative of letting the State perish,
or of violating the sacred right of property, which is its support,
constitutes the great difficulty of just and prudent economy.

The first step which the founder of a republic ought to take after
the establishment of laws, is to settle a sufficient fund for the
maintenance of the Magistrates and other Officials, and for other
public expenses. This fund, if it consist of money, is called
_oerarium_ or _fisc_, and _public demesne_ if it consist of lands.
This, for obvious reasons, is much to be preferred. Whoever has
reflected on this matter must be of the opinion of Bodin, who looks
upon the public demesne as the most reputable and certain means of
providing for the needs of the State. It is remarkable also that
Romulus, in his division of lands, made it his first care to set apart
a third for the use of the State. I confess it is not impossible for
the produce of the demesne, if it be badly managed, to be reduced to
nothing; but it is not of the essence of public demesnes to be badly
administered.

Before any use is made of this fund, it should be assigned or accepted
by an assembly of the people, or of the estates of the country, which
should determine its future use. After this solemnity, which makes such
funds inalienable, their very nature is, in a manner, changed, and
the revenues become so sacred, that it is not only the most infamous
theft, but actual treason, to misapply them or pervert them from the
purpose for which they were destined. It reflects great dishonour
on Rome that the integrity of Cato the censor was something so very
remarkable, and that an Emperor, on rewarding the talents of a singer
with a few crowns, thought it necessary to observe that the money came
from his own private purse, and not from that of the State. But if we
find few Galbas, where are we to look for a Cato? For when vice is no
longer dishonourable, what chiefs will be so scrupulous as to abstain
from touching the public revenues that are left to their discretion,
and even not in time to impose on themselves, by pretending to confound
their own expensive and scandalous dissipations with the glory of the
State, and the means of extending their own authority with the means
of augmenting its power? It is particularly in this delicate part of
the administration that virtue is the only effective instrument, and
that the integrity of the Magistrate is the only real check upon his
avarice. Books and auditing of accounts, instead of exposing frauds,
only conceal them; for prudence is never so ready to conceive new
precautions as knavery is to elude them. Never mind, then, about
account books and papers; place the management of finance in honest
hands: that is the only way to get it faithfully conducted.

When public funds are once established, the rulers of the State
become of right the administrators of them: for this administration
constitutes a part of government which is always essential, though
not always equally so. Its influence increases in proportion as that
of other resources is diminished; and it may justly be said that a
government has reached the last stage of corruption, when it has ceased
to have sinews other than money. Now as every government constantly
tends to become lax, this is enough to show why no State can subsist
unless its revenues constantly increase.

The first sense of the necessity of this increase is also the
first sign of the internal disorder of the State; and the prudent
administrator, in his endeavours to find means to provide for the
present necessity, will neglect nothing to find out the distant cause
of the new need; just as a mariner when he finds the water gaining
on his vessel, does not neglect, while he is working the pumps, to
discover and stop the leak.

From this rule is deduced the most important rule in the administration
of finance, which is, to take more pains to guard against needs than
to increase revenues. For, whatever diligence be employed, the relief
which only comes after, and more slowly than, the evil, always leaves
some injury behind. While a remedy is being found for one evil, another
is beginning to make itself felt, and even the remedies themselves
produce new difficulties: so that at length the nation is involved in
debt and the people oppressed, while the government loses its influence
and can do very little with a great deal of money. I imagine it was
owing to the recognition of this rule that such wonders were done by
ancient governments, which did more with their parsimony than ours do
with all their treasures; and perhaps from this comes the common use of
the word _economy_, which means rather the prudent management of what
one has than ways of getting what one has not.

But apart from the public demesne, which is of service to the State in
proportion to the uprightness of those who govern, any one sufficiently
acquainted with the whole force of the general administration,
especially when it confines itself to legitimate methods, would be
astonished at the resources the rulers can make use of for guarding
against public needs, without trespassing on the goods of individuals.
As they are masters of the whole commerce of the State, nothing is
easier for them than to direct it into such channels as to provide
for every need, without appearing to interfere. The distribution of
provisions, money, and merchandise in just proportions, according to
times and places, is the true secret of finance and the source of
wealth, provided those who administer it have foresight enough to
suffer a present apparent loss, in order really to obtain immense
profits in the future. When we see a government paying bounties,
instead of receiving duties, on the exportation of corn in time of
plenty, and on its importation in time of scarcity, we must have such
facts before our eyes if we are to be persuaded of their reality.
We should hold such facts to be idle tales, if they had happened in
ancient times. Let us suppose that, in order to prevent a scarcity in
bad years, a proposal were made to establish public granaries; would
not the maintenance of so useful an institution serve in most countries
as an excuse for new taxes? At Geneva, such granaries, established
and kept up by a prudent administration, are a public resource in bad
years, and the principal revenue of the State at all times. _Alit et
ditat_ is the inscription which stands, rightly and properly, on the
front of the building. To set forth in this place the economic system
of a good government, I have often turned my eyes to that of this
Republic, rejoicing to find in my own country an example of that wisdom
and happiness which I should be glad to see prevail in every other.

If we ask how the needs of a State grow, we shall find they generally
arise, like the wants of individuals, less from any real necessity
than from the increase of useless desires, and that expenses are often
augmented only to give a pretext for raising receipts: so that the
State would sometimes gain by not being rich, and apparent wealth is in
reality more burdensome than poverty itself would be. Rulers may indeed
hope to keep the peoples in stricter dependence, by thus giving them
with one hand what they take from them with the other; and this was in
fact the policy of Joseph towards the Egyptians: but this political
sophistry is the more fatal to the State, as the money never returns
into the hands it went out of. Such principles only enrich the idle at
the expense of the industrious.

A desire for conquest is one of the most evident and dangerous causes
of this increase. This desire, occasioned often by a different species
of ambition from that which, it seems to proclaim, is not always
what it appears to be, and has not so much, for its real motive, the
apparent desire to aggrandise the Nation as a secret desire to increase
the authority of the rulers at home, by increasing the number of
troops, and by the diversion which the objects of war occasion in the
minds of the citizens.

It is at least certain, that no peoples are so oppressed and wretched
as conquering nations, and that their successes only increase their
misery. Did not history inform us of the fact, reason would suffice
to tell us that, the greater a State grows, the heavier and more
burdensome in proportion its expenses become: for every province has
to furnish its share to the general expense of government, and besides
has to be at the expense of its own administration, which is as great
as if it were really independent. Add to this that great fortunes are
always acquired in one place and spent in another. Production therefore
soon ceases to balance consumption, and a whole country is impoverished
merely to enrich a single town.

Another source of the increase of public wants, which depends on the
foregoing, is this. There may come a time when the citizens, no longer
looking upon themselves as interested in the common cause, will cease
to be the defenders of their country, and the Magistrates will prefer
the command of mercenaries to that of free-men; if for no other reason
than that, when the time comes, they may use them to reduce free-men to
submission. Such was the state of Rome towards the end of the Republic
and under the Emperors: for all the victories of the early Romans,
like those of Alexander, had been won by brave citizens, who were
ready, at need, to give their blood in the service of their country,
but would never sell it. Only at the siege of Veii did the practice
of paying the Roman infantry begin. Marius, in the Jugurthine war,
dishonoured the legions by introducing freedmen, vagabonds and other
mercenaries. Tyrants, the enemies of the very people it was their duty
to make happy, maintained regular troops, apparently to withstand
the foreigner, but really to enslave their countrymen. To form such
troops, it was necessary to take men from the land; the lack of their
labour then diminished the amount of provisions, and their maintenance
introduced those taxes which increased prices. This first disorder
gave rise to murmurs among the people; in order to suppress them, the
number of troops had to be increased, and consequently the misery
of the people also got worse; and the growing despair led to still
further increases in the cause in order to guard against its effects.
On the other hand, the mercenaries, whose merit we may judge of by the
price at which they sold themselves, proud of their own meanness, and
despising the laws that protected them, as well as their fellows whose
bread they ate, imagined themselves more honoured in being Cæsar's
satellites than in being defenders of Rome. As they were given over
to blind obedience, their swords were always at the throats of their
fellow-citizens, and they were prepared for general butchery at the
first sign. It would not be difficult to show that this was one of the
principal causes of the ruin of the Roman Empire.

The invention of artillery and fortifications has forced the princes
of Europe, in modern times, to return to the use of regular troops, in
order to garrison their towns; but> however lawful their motives, it is
to be feared the effect may be no less fatal. There is no better reason
now than formerly for depopulating the country to form armies and
garrisons, nor should the people be oppressed to support, them; in a
word, these dangerous establishments have increased of late years with
such rapidity in this part of the world, that they evidently threaten
to depopulate Europe, and sooner or later to ruin its inhabitants.

Be this as it may, it ought to be seen that such institutions
necessarily subvert the true economic system, which draws the principal
revenue of the State from the public demesne, and leave only the
troublesome resource of subsidies and imposts; with which it remains to
deal.

It should be remembered that the foundation of the social compact is
property; and its first condition, that every one should be maintained
in the peaceful possession of what belongs to him. It is true that,
by the same treaty, every one binds himself, at least tacitly, to
be assessed toward the public wants: but as this undertaking cannot
prejudice the fundamental law, and presupposes that the need is
clearly recognised by all who contribute to it, it is plain that such
assessment, in order to be lawful, must be voluntary; it must depend,
not indeed on a particular will, as if it were necessary to have the
consent of each individual, and that he should give no more than just
what he pleased, but on a general will, decided by vote of a majority,
and on the basis of a proportional rating which leaves nothing
arbitrary in the imposition of the tax.

That taxes cannot be legitimately established except by the consent of
the people or its representatives, is a truth generally admitted by all
philosophers and jurists of any repute on questions of public right,
not even excepting Bodin. If any of them have laid down rules which
seem to contradict this, their particular motives for doing so may
easily be seen; and they introduce so many conditions and restrictions
that the argument comes at bottom to the same thing: for whether the
people has it in its power to refuse, or the Sovereign ought not to
exact, is a matter of indifference with regard to right; and if the
point in question concerns only power, it is useless to inquire whether
it is legitimate or not. Contributions levied on the people are two
kinds; real, levied on commodities, and personal, paid by the head.
Both are called taxes or subsidies: when the people fixes the sum
to be paid, it is called subsidy; but when it grants the product of
an imposition, it is called a tax. We are told in the Spirit of the
Laws that a capitation tax is most suited to slavery, and a real tax
most in accordance with liberty. This would be incontestable, if the
circumstances of every person were equal; for otherwise nothing can be
more disproportionate than such a tax; and it is in the observations of
exact proportions that the spirit of liberty consists. But if a tax by
heads were exactly proportioned to the circumstances of individuals, as
what is called the capitation tax in France might be, is would be the
most equitable and consequently the most proper for free-men.

These proportions appear at first very easy to note, because, being
relative to each man's position in the world, their incidence is always
public: but proper regard is seldom paid to all the elements that
should enter into such a calculation, even apart from deception arising
from avarice, fraud and self-interest. In the first place, we have
to consider the relation of quantities, according to which, _ceteris
paribus_, the person who has ten times the property of another man
ought to pay ten times as much to the State. Secondly, the relation of
the use made, that is to say, the distinction between necessaries and
superfluities. He who possesses only the common necessaries of life
should pay nothing at all, while the tax on him who is in possession
of superfluities may justly be extended to everything he has over and
above mere necessaries. To this he will possibly object that, when
his rank is taken into account, what may be superfluous to a man of
inferior station is necessary for him. But this is false: for a grandee
has two legs just like a cow-herd, and, like him again, but one belly.
Besides, these pretended necessaries are really so little necessary
to his rank, that if he should renounce them on any worthy occasion,
he would only be the more honoured. The populace would be ready to
adore a Minister who went to Council on foot, because he had sold off
his carriages to supply a pressing need of the State. Lastly, to no
man does the law prescribe magnificence; and propriety is no argument
against right.

A third relation, which is never taken into account, though it ought to
be the chief consideration, is the advantage that every person derives
from the social confederacy; for this provides a powerful protection
for the immense possessions of the rich, and hardly leaves the poor
man in quiet possession of the cottage he builds with his own hands.
Are not all the advantages of society for the rich and powerful?
Are not all lucrative posts in their hands? Are not all privileges
and exemptions reserved for them alone? Is not the public authority
always on their side? If a man of eminence robs his creditors, or is
guilty of other knaveries, is he not always assured of impunity? Are
not the assaults, acts of violence, assassinations, and even murders
committed by the great, matters that are hushed up in a few months,
and of which nothing more is thought? But if a great man himself is
robbed or insulted, the whole police force is immediately in motion,
and woe even to innocent persons who chance to be suspected. If he has
to pass through any dangerous road, the country is up in arms to escort
him. If the axle-tree of his chaise breaks, everybody flies to his
assistance. If there is a noise at his door, he speaks but a word, and
all is silent. If he is incommoded by the crowd, he waves his hand and
every one makes way. If his coach is met on the road by a wagon, his
servants are ready to beat the driver's brains out, and fifty honest
pedestrians going quietly about their business had better be knocked on
the head than an idle jackanapes be delayed in his coach. Yet all this
respect costs him not a farthing: it is the rich man's right, and not
what he buys with his wealth. How different the case of the poor man!
the more humanity owes him, the more society denies him. Every door is
shut against him, even when he has a right to its being opened: and
if ever he obtains justice, it is with much greater difficulty than
others obtain favours. If the militia is to be raised or the highway
to be mended, he is always given the preference; he always bears the
burden which his richer neighbour has influence enough to get exempted
from. On the least accident that happens to him, everybody avoids him:
if his cart be overturned in the road, so far is he from receiving
any assistance, that he is lucky if he does not get horse-whipped by
the impudent lackeys of some young Duke; in a word, all gratuitous
assistance is denied to the poor when they need it, just because they
cannot pay for it. I look upon any poor man as totally undone, if he
has the misfortune to have an honest heart, a fine daughter, and a
powerful neighbour.

Another no less important fact is that the losses of the poor are much
harder to repair than those of the rich, and that the difficulty of
acquisition is always greater in proportion as there is more need for
it. "Nothing comes out of nothing," is as true of life as in physics:
money is the seed of money, and the first guinea is sometimes more
difficult to acquire than the second million. Add to this that what
the poor pay is lost to them for ever, and remains in, or returns to,
the hands of the rich: and as, to those who share in the government
or to their dependents, the whole produce of the taxes must sooner or
later pass, although they pay their share, these persons have always a
sensible interest in increasing them.

The terms of the social compact between these two estates of men may
be summed up in a few words. "You have need of me, because I am rich
and you are poor. We will therefore come to an agreement. I will permit
you to have the honour of serving me, on condition that you bestow on
me the little you have left, in return for the pains I shall take to
command you."

Putting all these considerations carefully together, we shall find
that, in order to levy taxes in a truly equitable and proportionate
manner, the imposition ought not to be in simple ratio to the property
of the contributors, but in compound ratio to the difference of
their conditions and the superfluity of their possessions. This very
important and difficult operation is daily made by numbers of honest
clerks, who know their arithmetic; but a Plato or a Montesquieu would
not venture to undertake it without the greatest diffidence, or
without praying to Heaven for understanding and integrity.

Another disadvantage of personal taxes is that they may be too much
felt or raised with too great severity. This, however, does not prevent
them from being frequently evaded; for it is much easier for persons to
escape a tax than for their possessions.

Of all impositions, that on land, or real taxation, has always been
regarded as most advantageous in countries where more attention is
paid to what the tax will produce, and to the certainty of recovering
the product, than to securing the least discomfort for the people. It
has been even maintained that it is necessary to burden the peasant
in order to rouse him from indolence, and that he would never work
if he had no taxes to pay. But in all countries experience confutes
this ridiculous notion. In England and Holland the farmer pays very
little, and in China nothing: yet these are the countries in which the
land is best cultivated. On the other hand, in those countries where
the husbandman is taxed in proportion to the produce of his lands, he
leaves them uncultivated, or reaps just as much from them as suffices
for bare subsistence. For to him who loses the fruit of his labour, it
is some gain to do nothing. To lay a tax on industry is a very singular
expedient for banishing idleness.

Taxes on land or corn, especially when they are excessive, lead to two
results so fatal in their effect that they cannot but depopulate and
ruin, in the long run, all countries in which they are established.

The first of these arises from the defective circulation of specie;
for industry and commerce draw all the money from the country into the
capitals: and as the tax destroys the proportion there might otherwise
be between the needs of the husbandman and the price of his corn, money
is always leaving and never returning. Thus the richer the city the
poorer the country. The product of the taxes passes from the hands of
the Prince or his financial officers into those of artists and traders;
and the husbandman, who receives, only the smallest part of it, is at
length exhausted by paying always the same, and receiving constantly
less. How could a human body subsist if it had veins and no arteries,
or if its arteries conveyed the blood only within four inches of the
heart? Chardin tells us that in Persia the royal dues on commodities
are paid in kind: this custom, which, Herodotus informs us, prevailed
long ago in the same country down to the time of Darius, might prevent
the evil of which I have been speaking. But unless Intendants,
Directors, Commissioners and Warehousemen in Persia are a different
kind of people from what they are elsewhere, I can hardly believe
that the smallest part of this produce ever reaches the king, or that
the corn is not spoilt in every granary, and the greater part of the
warehouses not consumed by fire.

The second evil effect arises from an apparent advantage, which
aggravates the evil before it can be perceived. That is that corn is a
commodity whose price is not enhanced by taxes in the country producing
it, and which, in spite of its absolute necessity, may be diminished
in quantity without the price being increased. Hence, many people die
of hunger, although corn remains cheap, and the husbandman bears the
whole charge of a tax, for which he cannot indemnify himself by the
price of his corn. It must be observed that we ought not to reason
about a land-tax in the same manner as about duties laid on various
kinds of merchandise; for the effect of such duties is to raise the
price, and they are paid by the buyers rather than the sellers. For
these duties, however heavy, are still voluntary, and are paid by the
merchant only in proportion to the quantity he buys; and as he buys
only in proportion to his sale, he himself gives the law its particular
application; but the farmer who is obliged to pay his rent at stated
times, whether he sells or not, cannot wait till he can get his own
price for his commodity: even if he is not forced to sell for mere
subsistence, he must sell to pay the taxes; so that it is frequently
the heaviness of the tax that keeps the price of corn low.

It is further to be noticed that the resources of commerce and industry
are so far from rendering the tax more supportable through abundance
of money, that they only render it more burdensome. I shall not insist
on what is very evident; _i.e._ that, although a greater or less
quantity of money in a State may give it the greater or less credit in
the eye of the foreigner, it makes not the least difference to the
real fortune of the citizens, and does not make their condition any
more or less comfortable. But I must make these two important remarks:
first, unless a State possesses superfluous commodities, and abundance
of money results from foreign trade, only trading cities are sensible
of the abundance; while the peasant only becomes relatively poorer.
Secondly, as the price of everything is enhanced by the increase of
money, taxes also must be proportionately increased; so that the farmer
will find himself still more burdened without having more resources.

It ought to be observed that the tax on land is a real duty on the
produce. It is universally agreed, however, that nothing is so
dangerous as a tax on corn paid by the purchaser: but how comes it we
do not see that it is a hundred times worse when the duty is paid by
the cultivator himself? Is not this an attack on the substance of the
State at its very source? Is it not the directest possible method of
depopulating a country, and therefore in the end ruining it? For the
worst kind of scarcity a nation can suffer from is lack of inhabitants.

Only the real statesman can rise, in imposing taxes, above the
mere financial object: he alone can transform heavy burdens into
useful regulations, and make the people even doubtful whether such
establishments were not calculated rather for the good of the nation in
general, than merely for the raising of money.

Duties on the importation of foreign commodities, of which the natives
are fond, without the country standing in need of them; on the
exportation of those of the growth of the country which are not too
plentiful, and which foreigners cannot do without; on the productions
of frivolous and all too lucrative arts; on the importation of all pure
luxuries; and in general on all objects of luxury; will answer the
two-fold end in view. It is by such taxes, indeed, by which the poor
are eased, and the burdens thrown on the rich, that it is possible to
prevent the continual increase of inequality of fortune; the subjection
of such a multitude of artisans and useless servants to the rich, the
multiplication of idle persons in our cities, and the depopulation of
the country-side.

It is important that the value of any commodity and the duties laid
on it should be so proportioned that the avarice of individuals may
not be too strongly tempted to fraud by the greatness of the possible
profit. To make smuggling difficult, those commodities should be
singled out which are hardest to conceal. All duties should be rather
paid by the consumer of the commodity taxed than by him who sells it:
as the quantity of duty he would be obliged to pay would lay him open
to greater temptations, and afford him more opportunities for fraud.

This is the constant custom in China, a country where the taxes are
greater and yet better paid than in any other part of the world.
The merchant himself there pays no duty; the buyer alone, without
murmuring or sedition, meets the whole charge; for as the necessaries
of life, such as rice and corn, are absolutely exempt from taxation,
the common people is not oppressed, and the duty falls only on those
who are well-to-do. Precautions against smuggling ought not to be
dictated so much by the fear of it occurring, as by the attention which
the government should pay to securing individuals from being seduced
by illegitimate profits, which first make them bad citizens, and
afterwards soon turn them into dishonest men.

Heavy taxes should be laid on servants in livery, on equipages, rich
furniture, fine clothes, on spacious courts and gardens, on public
entertainments of all kinds, on useless professions, such as dancers,
singers, players, and in a word, on all that multiplicity of objects
of luxury, amusement and idleness, which strike the eyes of all, and
can the less be hidden, as their whole purpose is to be seen, without
which they would be useless. We need be under no apprehension of the
produce of these taxes being arbitrary, because they are laid on things
not absolutely necessary. They must know but little of mankind who
imagine that, after they have been once seduced by luxury, they can
ever renounce it: they would a hundred times sooner renounce common
necessaries, and had much rather die of hunger than of shame. The
increase in their expense is only an additional reason for supporting
them, when the vanity of appearing wealthy reaps its profit from the
price of the thing and the charge of the tax. As long as there are rich
people in the world, they will be desirous of distinguishing themselves
from the poor, nor can the State devise a revenue less burdensome or
more certain than what arises from this distinction.

For the same reason, industry would have nothing to suffer from an
economic system which increased the revenue, encouraged agriculture by
relieving the husbandman, and insensibly tended to bring all fortunes
nearer to that middle condition which constitutes the genuine strength
of the State. These taxes might, I admit, bring certain fashionable
articles of dress and amusement to an untimely end; but it would be
only to substitute others, by which the artificer would gain, and the
exchequer suffer no loss. In a word, suppose the spirit of government
was constantly to tax only the superfluities of the rich, one of two
things must happen: either the rich would convert their superfluous
expenses into useful ones, which would redound to the profit of the
State, and thus the imposition of taxes would have the effect of the
best sumptuary laws, the expenses of the State would necessarily
diminish with those of individuals, and the treasury would not receive
so much less as it would gain by having less to pay; or, if the
rich did not become less extravagant, the exchequer would have such
resources in the product of taxes on their expenditure as would provide
for the needs of the State. In the first case the treasury would be
the richer by what it would save, from having the less to do with its
money; and in the second, it would be enriched by the useless expenses
of individuals.

We may add to all this a very important distinction in matters of
political right, to which governments, constantly tenacious of doing
everything for themselves, ought to pay great attention. It has been
observed that personal taxes and duties on the necessaries of life, as
they directly trespass on the right of property, and consequently on
the true foundation of political society, are always liable to have
dangerous results, if they are not established with the express consent
of the people or its representatives. It is not the same with articles
the use of which we can deny ourselves; for as the individual is under
no absolute necessity to pay, his contribution may count as voluntary.
The particular consent of each contributor then takes the place of the
general consent of the whole people: for why should a people oppose the
imposition of a tax which falls only on those who desire to pay it? It
appears to me certain that everything, which is not proscribed by law,
or contrary to morality, and yet may be prohibited by the government,
may also be permitted on payment of a certain duty. Thus, for example,
if the government may prohibit the use of coaches, it may certainly
impose a tax on them; and this is a prudent and useful method of
censuring their use without absolutely forbidding it. In this case, the
tax may be regarded as a sort of fine, the product of which compensates
for the abuse it punishes.

It may perhaps be objected that those, whom Bodin calls _impostors_,
_i.e._ those who impose or contrive the taxes, being in the class of
the rich, will be far from sparing themselves to relieve the poor. But
this is quite beside the point. If, in every nation, those to whom
the Sovereign commits the government of the people, were, from their
position, its enemies, it would not be worth while to inquire what they
ought to do to make the people happy.