ESSAY III.
ON THE WORDS PRODUCTIVE AND UNPRODUCTIVE.


It would probably be difficult to point out any two words, respecting
the proper use of which political economists have been more divided,
than they have been concerning the two words _productive_ and
_unproductive_; whether considered as applied to _labour_, to
_consumption_, or to _expenditure_.

Although this is a question solely of nomenclature, it is one of
sufficient importance to be worth another attempt to settle it
satisfactorily. For, although writers on political economy have not
agreed in the ideas which they were accustomed to annex to these terms,
the terms have generally been employed to denote ideas of very great
importance, and it is impossible that some vagueness should not have
been thrown upon the ideas themselves by looseness in the use of the
words by which they are habitually designated. Further, so long as the
pedantic objection to the introduction of new technical terms continues,
accurate thinkers on moral and political subjects are limited to a very
scanty vocabulary for the expression of their ideas. It therefore is of
great importance that the words with which mankind are familiar, should
be turned to the greatest possible advantage as instruments of thought;
that one word should not be used as the sign of an idea which is already
sufficiently expressed by another word; and that words which are
required to denote ideas of great importance, should not be usurped for
the expression of such as are comparatively insignificant.

The phrases _productive labour_, and _productive consumption_, have been
employed by some writers on political economy with very great latitude.
They have considered, and classed, as productive labour and productive
consumption, all labour which serves any _useful_ purpose--all
consumption which is not _waste_. Mr. M'Culloch has asserted, _totidem
verbis_, that the labour of Madame Pasta was as well entitled to be
called productive labour as that of a cotton spinner.

Employed in this sense, the words _productive_ and _unproductive_ are
superfluous, since the words _useful_ and _agreeable_ on the one hand,
_useless_ and _worthless_ on the other, are quite sufficient to express
all the ideas to which the words _productive_ and _unproductive_ are
here applied.

This use of the terms, therefore, is subversive of the ends of language.

Those writers who have employed the words in a more limited sense, have
usually understood by productive or unproductive labour, labour which is
productive of wealth, or unproductive of wealth. But what is wealth? And
here the words productive and unproductive have been affected with
additional ambiguities, corresponding to the different extension which
different writers have given to the term wealth.

Some have given the name of wealth to _all things_ which tend to the use
or enjoyment of mankind, and which possess exchangeable value. This last
clause is added to exclude air, the light of the sun, and any other
things which can be obtained in unlimited quantity without labour or
sacrifice; together with all such things as, though produced by labour,
are not held in sufficient general estimation to command any price in
the market.

But when this definition came to be explained, many persons were
disposed to interpret "_all things_ which tend to the use or enjoyment
of man," as implying only all _material_ things. _Immaterial_ products
they refused to consider as wealth; and labour or expenditure which
yielded nothing but immaterial products, they characterised as
unproductive labour and unproductive expenditure.

To this it was, or might have been, answered, that according to this
classification, a carpenter's labour at his trade is productive labour,
but the same individual's labour in learning his trade was unproductive
labour. Yet it is obvious that, on both occasions, his labour tended
exclusively to what is allowed to be production: the one was equally
indispensable with the other, to the ultimate result. Further, if we
adopted the above definition, we should be obliged to say that a nation
whose artisans were twice as skilful as those of another nation, was
not, _ceteris paribus_, more wealthy; although it is evident that every
one of the results of wealth, and everything for the sake of which
wealth is desired, would be possessed by the former country in a higher
degree than by the latter.

Every classification according to which a basket of cherries, gathered
and eaten the next minute, are called wealth, while that title is denied
to the acquired skill of those who are acknowledged to be productive
labourers, is a purely arbitrary division, and does not conduce to the
ends for which classification and nomenclature are designed.

In order to get over all difficulties, some political economists seem
disposed to make the terms express a distinction sufficiently definite
indeed, but more completely arbitrary, and having less foundation in
nature, than any of the former. They will not allow to any labour or to
any expenditure the name of productive, unless the produce which it
yields returns into the hands of the very person who made the outlay.
Hedging and ditching they term productive labour, though those
operations conduce to production only indirectly, by protecting the
produce from destruction; but the necessary expenses incurred by a
government for the protection of property are, they insist upon it,
consumed unproductively: though, as has been well pointed out by Mr.
M'Culloch, these expenses, in their relation to the national wealth, are
exactly analogous to the wages of a hedger or a ditcher. The only
difference is, that the farmer, who pays for the hedging and ditching,
is the person to whom the consequent increase of production accrues,
while the government, which is at the expense of police officers and
courts of justice, does not, as a necessary consequence, get back into
its own coffers the increase of the national wealth resulting from the
security of property.

It would be endless to point out the oddities and incongruities which
result from this classification. Whether we take the words wealth and
production in the largest, or in the most restricted sense in which they
have ever yet been employed, nobody will dispute that roads, bridges,
and canals, contribute in an eminent degree, and in a very direct
manner, to the increase of production and wealth. The labour and
pecuniary resources employed in their construction would, according to
the above theory, be considered productive, if every occupier of land
were compelled by law to construct so much of the road, or canal, as
passes through his own farm. If, instead of this, the government makes
the road, and throws it open to the public toll-free, the labour and
expenditure would be, on the above system, clearly unproductive. But if
the government, or an association of individuals, made the road, and
imposed a toll to defray the expense, we do not see how these writers
could refuse to the outlay the title of productive expenditure. It would
follow, that the very same labour and expense, if given gratuitously,
must be called unproductive, which, if a charge had been made for it,
would have been called productive.

When these consequences of the purely arbitrary classification to which
we allude have been pointed out and complained of, the only answer which
we have ever seen made to the objection is, that the line of demarcation
must be drawn somewhere, and that in every classification there are
intermediate cases, which might have been included, with almost equal
propriety, either in the one class or in the other.

This answer appears to us to indicate the want of a sufficiently
accurate and discriminating perception, what is the kind of inaccuracy
which generally cannot be avoided in a classification, and what is that
other kind of inaccuracy, from which it always may be, and should be,
exempt.

The classes themselves may be, mentally speaking, perfectly definite,
though it may not always be easy to say to which of them a particular
object belongs. When it is uncertain in which of two classes an object
should be placed, if the classification be properly made, and properly
expressed, the uncertainty can turn only upon a matter of fact. It is
uncertain to which class the object belongs, because it is doubtful
whether it possesses in a greater degree the characteristics of the one
class or those of the other. But the characteristics themselves may be
defined and distinguished with the nicest exactness, and always ought to
be so. Especially ought they in a case like the present, because here it
is only the distinction between the ideas which is of any importance.
That we should be able with ease to portion out all employments between
the two classes, does not happen to be of any particular consequence.

It is frequently said that classification is a mere affair of
convenience. This assertion is true in one sense, but not if its meaning
be, that the most proper classification is that in which it is easiest
to say whether an object belongs to one class or to the other. The use
of classification is, to fix attention upon the distinctions which exist
among things; and that is the best classification, which is founded upon
the most important distinctions, whatever be the facilities which it may
afford of ticketing and arranging the different objects which exist in
nature. In fixing, therefore, the meaning of the words productive and
unproductive, we ought to endeavour to render them significative of the
most important distinctions which, without too glaring a violation of
received usage, they can be made to express.

We ought further, when we are restricted to the employment of old words,
to endeavour as far as possible that it shall not be necessary to
struggle against the old associations with those words. We should, if
possible, give the words such a meaning, that the propositions in which
people are accustomed to use them, shall as far as possible still be
true; and that the feelings habitually excited by them, shall be such as
the things to which we mean to appropriate them ought to excite.

We shall endeavour to unite these conditions in the result of the
following enquiry.

In whatever manner political economists may have settled the definition
of productive and unproductive labour or consumption, the consequences
which they have drawn from the definition are nearly the same. In
proportion to the amount of the productive labour and consumption of
a country, the country, they all allow, is enriched: in proportion to
the amount of the unproductive labour and consumption, the country is
impoverished. Productive expenditure they are accustomed to view as
a gain; unproductive expenditure, however useful, as a sacrifice.
Unproductive expenditure of what was destined to be expended
productively, they always characterise as a squandering of resources,
and call it profusion and prodigality. The productive expenditure of
that which might, without encroaching upon capital, be expended
unproductively, is called saving, economy, frugality. Want, misery, and
starvation, are described as the lot of a nation which annually employs
less and less of its labour and resources in production; growing comfort
and opulence as the result of an annual increase in the quantity of
wealth so employed.

Let us then examine what qualities in expenditure, and in the employment
of labour, are those from which all the consequences above mentioned
really flow.

The end to which all labour and all expenditure are directed, is
twofold. Sometimes it is _enjoyment_ immediately; the fulfilment of
those desires, the gratification of which is wished for on its own
account. Whenever labour or expense is not incurred _immediately_ for
the sake of enjoyment, and is yet not absolutely wasted, it must be
incurred for the purpose of enjoyment _indirectly_ or mediately; by
either repairing and perpetuating, or adding, to the _permanent sources_
of enjoyment.

Sources of enjoyment may be accumulated and stored up; enjoyment itself
cannot. The wealth of a country consists of the sum total of the
permanent sources of enjoyment, whether material or immaterial, contained
in it: and labour or expenditure which tends to augment or to keep up
these permanent sources, should, we conceive, be termed productive.

Labour which is employed for the purpose of directly affording
enjoyment, such as the labour of a performer on a musical instrument, we
term unproductive labour. Whatever is consumed by such a performer, we
consider as unproductively consumed: the accumulated total of the
sources of enjoyment which the nation possesses, is diminished by the
amount of what he has consumed: whereas, if it had been given to him in
exchange for his services in producing food or clothing, the total of
the permanent sources of enjoyment in the country might have been not
diminished but increased.

The performer on the musical instrument then is, so far as respects that
act, not a productive, but an unproductive labourer. But what shall we
say of the workman who made the musical instrument? He, most persons
would say, is a productive labourer; and with reason; because the
musical instrument is a permanent source of enjoyment, which does not
begin and end with the enjoying, and therefore admits of being
accumulated.

But the _skill_ of the musician is a permanent source of enjoyment, as
well as the instrument which he plays upon: and although skill is not a
material object, but a quality of an object, viz., of the hands and mind
of the performer; nevertheless skill possesses exchangeable value, is
acquired by labour and capital, and is capable of being stored and
accumulated. Skill, therefore, must be considered as wealth; and the
labour and funds employed in acquiring skill in anything tending to the
advantage or pleasure of mankind, must be considered to be productively
employed and expended.

The skill of a productive labourer is analogous to the machinery he
works with: neither of them is enjoyment, nor conduces directly to it,
but both conduce indirectly to it, and both in the same way. If a
spinning-jenny be wealth, the spinner's skill is also wealth. If the
mechanic who made the spinning-jenny laboured productively, the spinner
also laboured productively when he was learning his trade: and what they
both consumed was consumed productively, that is to say, its consumption
did not tend to diminish, but to increase the sum of the permanent
sources of enjoyment in the country, by effecting a new creation of
those sources, more than equal to the amount of the consumption.

The skill of a tailor, and the implements he employs, contribute in the
same way to the convenience of him who wears the coat, namely, a remote
way: it is the coat itself which contributes immediately. The skill of
Madame Pasta, and the building and decorations which aid the effect of
her performance, contribute in the same way to the enjoyment of the
audience, namely, an immediate way, without any intermediate
instrumentality. The building and decorations are consumed
unproductively, and Madame Pasta labours and consumes unproductively;
for the building is used and worn out, and Madame Pasta performs,
immediately for the spectators' enjoyment, and without leaving, as a
consequence of the performance, any permanent result possessing
exchangeable value: consequently the epithet unproductive must be
equally applied to the gradual wearing out of the bricks and mortar, the
nightly consumption of the more perishable "properties" of the theatre,
the labour of Madame Pasta in acting, and of the orchestra in playing.
But notwithstanding this, the architect who built the theatre was a
productive labourer; so were the producers of the perishable articles;
so were those who constructed the musical instruments; and so, we must
be permitted to add, were those who instructed the musicians, and all
persons who, by the instructions which they may have given to Madame
Pasta, contributed to the formation of her talent. All these persons
contributed to the enjoyment of the audience in the same way, and that
a remote way, viz., by the production of a _permanent source of
enjoyment_.

The difference between this case, and the case of the cotton spinner
already adverted to, is this. The spinning-jenny, and the skill of the
cotton spinner, are not only the result of productive labour, but are
themselves productively consumed. The musical instrument and the skill
of the musician are equally the result of productive labour, but are
themselves unproductively consumed.

Let us now consider what kinds of labour, and of consumption or
expenditure, will be classed as productive, and what as unproductive,
according to this rule.

The following are always productive:

Labour and expenditure, of which the direct object or effect is the
creation of some material product useful or agreeable to mankind.

Labour and expenditure, of which the direct effect and object are, to
endow human or other animated beings with faculties or qualities useful
or agreeable to mankind, and possessing exchangeable value.

Labour and expenditure, which without having for their direct object the
creation of any useful material product or bodily or mental faculty or
quality, yet tend indirectly to promote one or other of those ends, and
are exerted or incurred solely for that purpose.

The following are partly productive and partly unproductive, and cannot
with propriety be ranged decidedly with either class:

Labour or expenditure which does indeed create, or promote the creation
of, some useful material product or bodily or mental faculty or quality,
but which is not incurred or exerted for that sole end; having also for
another, and perhaps its principal end, enjoyment, or the promotion of
enjoyment.

Such are the labour of the judge, the legislator, the police-officer,
the soldier; and the expenditure incurred for their support. These
functionaries protect and secure mankind in the exclusive possession of
such material products or acquired faculties as belong to them; and by
the security which they so confer, they indirectly increase production
in a degree far more than equivalent to the expense which is necessary
for their maintenance. But this is not the only purpose for which they
exist; they protect mankind, not merely in the possession of their
permanent resources, but also in their actual enjoyments; and so far,
although highly useful, they cannot, conformably to the distinction
which we have attempted to lay down, be considered productive labourers.

Such, also, are the labour and the wages of domestic servants. Such
persons are entertained mainly as subservient to mere enjoyment; but
most of them occasionally, and some habitually, render services which
must be considered as of a productive nature; such as that of cookery,
the last stage in the manufacture of food; or gardening, a branch of
agriculture.

The following are wholly unproductive:

Labour exerted, and expenditure incurred, directly and exclusively for
the purpose of enjoyment, and not calling into existence anything,
whether substance or quality, but such as begins and perishes in the
enjoyment.

Labour exerted and expenditure incurred uselessly, or in pure waste, and
yielding neither direct enjoyment nor permanent sources of enjoyment.

It may be objected, that expenditure incurred even for pure enjoyment
promotes production indirectly, by inciting to exertion. Thus the view
of the splendour of a rich establishment is supposed by some writers to
produce upon the mind of an indigent spectator an earnest desire of
enjoying the same luxuries, and a consequent purpose of working with
vigour and diligence, and saving from his earnings, thus increasing the
productive capital of the country.

It is true that mankind are, for the most part, excited to productive
industry solely by the desire of subsequently consuming the result of
their labour and accumulation. The consumption called unproductive,
viz., that of which the direct result is enjoyment, is in reality the
end, to which production is only the means; and a desire for the end,
is what alone impels any one to have recourse to the means.

But, notwithstanding this, it is of the greatest importance to mark the
distinction between the labour and the consumption which have enjoyment
for their immediate end, and the labour and the consumption of which the
immediate end is reproduction. Though the sight of the former may still
further stimulate that desire for the enjoyments afforded by wealth,
which the mere knowledge, without the immediate view, would suffice to
excite (and without dwelling on the consideration that if the example
of a large expenditure excites one individual to accumulation, it
encourages two to prodigal expense); still, if we look only to the
effects which are intended, or to those which immediately follow from
the consumption, and whose connexion with it can be distinctly traced,
it evidently renders a country poorer in the permanent sources of
enjoyment; while reproductive consumption leaves the country richer in
these same sources. Besides, if what is spent for mere pleasure promotes
indirectly the increase of wealth, it can only be by inducing others
_not_ to expend on mere pleasure.

Before quitting the subject, one more observation should be added. It
must not be supposed that what is expended upon unproductive labourers
is necessarily, the whole of it, unproductively consumed. The
unproductive labourers may save part of their wages, and invest them in
a productive employment.

It is not unusual to speak of what is paid in wages to a labourer as
being thereby _consumed_, as if all profit and loss to the nation were
to be seen in the capitalist's account-book. What is paid for productive
labour is said to be productively consumed; what is paid for
unproductive labour is said to be consumed unproductively. It would be
proper to say, not that it is productively or unproductively _consumed_,
but productively or unproductively _expended_; otherwise, we shall be
obliged to say that it is consumed twice over; the first time
unproductively, perhaps, and the second, it may be, productively.

To pronounce in which way the wages of the labourer are consumed, we
must follow them into the labourer's own hands. As much as is necessary
to keep the productive labourer in perfect health and fitness for his
employment, may be said to be consumed productively. To this should be
added what he expends in rearing children to the age at which they
become capable of productive industry. If the state of the market for
labour be such as to afford him more, this he may either save, or, as
the common expression is, he may spend it. If he saves any portion, this
(unless it be merely hoarded) he intends to employ productively, and it
will be productively consumed. If he spends it, the consumption is for
enjoyment immediately, and is therefore unproductive.

This suggests another correction in the established language. Political
economists generally define the "net produce" to be that portion of the
gross annual produce of a country which remains after replacing the
capital annually consumed. This, as they proceed to explain, consists of
profits and rent; wages being included in the other portion of the gross
produce, that which goes to replace capital. After this definition, they
usually proceed to tell us that the net produce, and that alone,
constitutes the fund from which a nation can accumulate, and add to its
capital, as also that which it can, without retrograding in wealth,
expend unproductively, or for enjoyment. Now, it is impossible that both
the above propositions can be true. If the net produce is that which
remains after replacing capital, then net produce is not the only fund
out of which accumulation may be made: for accumulation may be made from
wages; this is in all countries one of the great sources, and in countries
like America perhaps the greatest source of accumulation. If, on the other
hand, it is desirable to reserve the name of net produce to denote the
fund available for accumulation or for unproductive consumption, we must
define net produce differently. The definition which appears the best
adapted to render the ordinary doctrines relating to net produce true,
would be this:

The net produce of a country is whatever is annually produced beyond
what is necessary for maintaining the stock of materials and implements
unimpaired, for keeping all productive labourers alive and in condition
for work, and for just keeping up their numbers without increase. What
is required for these purposes, or, in other words, for keeping up the
productive resources of the country, cannot be diverted from its
destination without rendering the nation as a whole poorer. But all
which is produced beyond this, whether it be in the hands of the
labourer, of the capitalist, or of any of the numerous varieties of
rent-owners, may be taken for immediate enjoyment, without prejudice to
the productive resources of the community; and whatever part of it is
not so taken, constitutes a clear addition to the national capital, or
to the permanent sources of enjoyment.