CHAPTER III

GREEK POLITICAL EVOLUTION


The politico-economic history of Greece has been less cleared up than
that of Rome, by reason not only of the greater complexity of the
problem, but of the predominance of literary specialism in Greek
studies.

     The modern Greek historian, Paparrigopoulo, has published in French
     an _Histoire de la Civilisation hellŽnique_ (Paris, 1878), which
     condenses his learned Greek work in five volumes; but the general
     view, though sometimes suggestive, is both scanty and superficial
     as regards ancient Greek history, and runs to an unprofitable
     effort at showing the "unity" of all Hellenic history, Pagan and
     Christian, in terms of an assumed conception of Hellenic character.

     The posthumous _Griechische Culturgeschichte_ of Jakob Burckhardt
     (1898) throws little light on social evolution. Trustworthy,
     weighty, and lucid, like all Burckhardt's work, it is rather a
     survey of Greek moral conditions than a study of social
     development, thus adding something of synthesis to the previous
     scholarly literature on the subject without reducing the phenomena
     to any theory of causation. It includes, however, good studies of
     vital social developments, such as slavery, to which Grote and
     Thirlwall paid surprisingly little attention, and which Mahaffy
     handles inadequately. This is also to be studied in W.R.
     Patterson's _Nemesis of Nations_ (1907)--with some caution as
     regards the political generalisations.

     Since the first edition of the present work there has appeared, in
     Dr. G.B. Grundy's _Thucydides and the History of his Age_ (1911) a
     new recognition of the fundamental character of economic conditions
     in Greek as in other history. Dr. Grundy, finding no academic
     precedent for his sociological method, has urged as new truths
     propositions which for economic historians are or should have been
     axioms. The result, however, is a really stimulating and valuable
     presentment of Greek history in terms of causal forces.

     The chapters on Greece in Dr. Cunningham's _Western Civilisation_
     (1898), though they contain not a few explanations of Greek
     culture-phenomena on the old lines, in terms of themselves, are
     helpful for the purposes of the present inquiry, since they really
     study causation, as do Meyer's _Wirthschaftliche Entwickelung des
     Alterthums_ and some other recent German treatises, of which Dr.
     Cunningham makes use.

     Much use, however, remains to be made of these and previous expert
     studies. Boeckh's great work on the _Public Economy of the
     Athenians_, which, though containing economic absurdities, hardly
     deserves even in that regard the strictures passed on it by the
     first English translator (Sir G.C. Lewis, 1828; 2nd ed. 1842;
     superior American ed. tr. from 2nd German ed. by A. Lamb, 1857),
     has not very fruitfully affected the later historians proper. The
     third German edition by FrŠnkel, 1886, typifies the course of
     scholarship. It corrects details and adds a mass of _apparatus
     criticus_ equal in bulk to the whole original work, but supplies no
     new ideas. Heeren's section on Greece in his _Ideen_, etc.,
     translated as a _Sketch of the Political History of Ancient Greece_
     (1829), and also as part of Heeren's _Thoughts on the Politics_,
     etc., of _the Ancient World_, is too full of early misconceptions
     to be well worth returning to, save for its general view. On the
     other hand, Grote's great _History of Greece_, though unmatched in
     its own species, and though a far more philosophical performance
     than that of Mitford (which Professor Mahaffy and the King of
     Greece agree in preferring for its doctrine), is substantially a
     narrative and critical history on the established lines, and does
     not aim at being more than incidentally sociological; and that of
     Bishop Thirlwall, though in parts superior in this regard, is
     substantially in similar case. At several points, indeed, Grote
     truly illuminates the sociological problem--notably in his view of
     the reactions between the Greek drama and the Greek life. Of the
     German general histories, that of Holm (Eng. tr. 4 vols. 1894-98)
     is a trustworthy and judicious embodiment of the latest research,
     but has no special intellectual weight, and is somewhat needlessly
     prolix. The history of Dr. Evelyn Abbott, so far as it has gone,
     has fully equal value in most respects; but both leave the need for
     a sociological history unsatisfied. Mr. Warde Fowler's _City State
     of the Greeks and Romans_ (1893) points in the right direction, but
     needs following up.

     Apart from Burckhardt and Cunningham, the nearest approach yet made
     to a sociological study of Greek civilisation is the series of
     works on Greek social history by Professor Mahaffy (_Social Life in
     Greece_; _Greek Life and Thought from the Age of Alexander to the
     Roman Conquest_; _The Greek World under Roman Sway_; _Problems of
     Greek History_; and _Survey of Greek Civilisation_). These learned
     and brilliant volumes have great value as giving more vivid ideas
     of Greek life than are conveyed by any of the regular histories,
     and as constantly stimulating reflection; but they lack method,
     omit much, and abound regrettably in capricious and inconsistent
     dicta. The _Survey_ is disappointing as emphasising rather than
     making good the defects of the previous treatises. G.F.
     Hertzberg's _Geschichte Griechenlands unter der Herrschaft der
     Ršmer_ (1866), and indeed all his works on Greek history, are
     always worth consulting.

     Some help may be had from the volume on Greece in the _Industrial
     History of the Free Nations_ by W.T. M'Cullagh (1846); but that
     fails to throw any light on what should have been its primary
     problem, the rise of Greek industry, and is rather sentimental than
     scientific in spirit. For later Greece, Finlay (_History of Greece
     from its Conquest by the Romans_, revised ed. 7 vols. 1877) becomes
     illuminating by his interest in economic law, though he holds
     uncritically enough by some now exploded principles, and exhibits
     some religious prejudice. His somewhat entangled opening sections
     express his difficulties as a pioneer in sociological
     history--difficulties only too abundantly apparent in the following
     pages. Professor J.B. Bury's _History of the Later Roman Empire_ (2
     vols. 1889) is an admirable work; but it does not attempt, save
     incidentally, to supersede Finlay in matters economic.


¤ 1

The political history of ancient Greece, similarly summarised, will
serve perhaps even better the purpose of illuminating later evolution.
That history has served historian after historian as a means of modern
polemic. The first considerable English historians of Greece, Gillies
and Mitford, pointed to the evil fate of Greek democracy as a conclusive
argument against countenancing democracy now; never stopping to ask
whether ancient monarchies had fared any better than the democracies.
And it is perfectly true that present-day democracies will tend to bad
fortune just as did the ancient unless they bottom themselves more
firmly and guide themselves by a deeper political science. It will not
suffice that we have rejected the foundation of slavery, on which all
the Greek polities rested. The strifes between the demos and the
aristocracy in the Greek City-States would have arisen just as surely,
though more slowly, if the demos, instead of being an upper-grade
populace owning slaves, had included the whole mass of the artisan and
serving class.[92] Where population increases at anything like the
natural animal rate, and infanticide is not overwhelming, poverty must
either force emigration or breed strife between the "have-nots" and the
"haves," barring such continuous stress of war as suffices at once to
thin numbers and yield conquerors the lands of the slain losers. During
some centuries the pressure was in part relieved by colonisation, as had
already happened among the Phoenicians;[93] the colonies themselves in
turn, with their more rapid evolution, developing the inevitable strife
of rich and poor more quickly and more violently than the mother
cities.[94] Among these, it was when that relief seemed to be exhausted
that strife became most dangerous, being obscurely perceived to be a
means to advancement and prosperity for individuals, as well as for the
State which could extort tribute or plunder from the others. War,
however, limits agriculture, so that food supply is kept proportionately
small; and with peace the principle of population soon overtakes lost
ground; so that, though the Greek States like others tended to gain in
solidarity under the stimulus of foreign war, the pressure of poverty
was always breeding fresh division.

If we take up Grecian history after the settling down of the prehistoric
invasions, which complicated the ordinary process of rupture and
fission, that process is seen occurring so frequently, and in so many
different States, that there can be no question as to the presence of a
general sociological law, not to be counteracted in any community save
by a radical change of conditions. Everywhere the phenomena are broadly
the same. The upper class ("upper" in virtue either of primary
advantages or of special faculty for acquiring wealth) attains to
providing for its future by holding multitudes of poorer citizens in
debt--the ancient adumbration of the modern developments of landlordism,
national debts, and large joint-stock enterprises, which yield
inheritable incomes. In early times, probably, debt led as often to
adult enslavement in Greece as in Rome;[95] but in a world of small and
warring City-States, shaken by domestic division, constantly making
slaves by capture and purchase, and always exposed to the risk of their
insurrection, this was too dangerous a course to be long persisted
in,[96] and the creditor was led to press his mortgaged debtor in other
ways. The son or the daughter was sold to pay the father's dues, or to
serve in perpetual payment of interest; and the cultivator's share was
ever at the lowest point. The pressure increases till the mass of
debtors are harassed into insurrection, or are used by an adventurer to
establish himself as despot.[97] Sometimes, in later days, the documents
of debt are publicly destroyed;[98] sometimes the land is divided
afresh.[99] Landholders burdened with debt would vote for the former
course and resist the latter;[100] and as that was clamoured for at
Athens in early times, it may be presumed that in some places it was
resorted to. Sometimes even a refunding of interest would be insisted
on.[101] Naturally such means of rectification availed only for a
moment; the despot stood a fair chance of being assassinated; the
triumphant demos would be caballed against; the exiled nobles, with the
cold rage of Theognis in their hearts, would return; and the last state
of the people would be worse than the first; till again slackened
vigilance on one side, and intolerable hardship on the other, renewed
the cycle of violent change.

In the course of ages there was perforce some approach to
equipoise;[102] but it was presumably at the normal cost of a definite
abasement of the populace;[103] and it was by a famous stroke of
statecraft that Athens was able so to solve her first great crisis as to
make possible some centuries of expanding democratic life. The name of
Solon is associated with an early crisis (594 B.C.) in which debt and
destitution among the Athenian demos (then still for the most part small
cultivators, for whom the city was a refuge fortress, but as a rule no
longer owning the land they tilled) brought matters to the same point as
was marked in Rome by the Secession of the Plebs. The Athenian oligarchy
was very much like the Roman; and when the two sides agreed to call in
Solon as arbitrator it was with a fairly general expectation that he
would take the opportunity to become tyrant. The people knew him to be
opposed to plutocratic tyranny; the nobles and traders, anxious for
security, thought him sure to be their friend; and both sorts had small
objection to such a one as "despot." But Solon, a noble of moderate
means, who had gained prestige in the wars of Athens with her
neighbour, Megara, and some knowledge of life as a travelling trader,
brought to his problem a higher vision than that of a Roman patrician,
and doubtless had a less barbarous stock to deal with. Later ages,
loosely manipulating tradition, ascribed to him a variety of laws that
he cannot have made;[104] but all the records concur in crediting him
with a "Seisachtheia," a "shaking-off-of-burdens," and a healing of the
worst of the open wounds of the body politic. All existing mortgages
were cancelled; all enslavement for debt was abolished; Athenians who
had been sold into alien slavery were bought back (probably by a
contribution from relieved debtors[105]); and the coinage was
recast--whether or not by way of reducing State payments is not clear.

     Grote (ii, 471), while eulogising Solon's plan as a whole, accepts
     the view that he debased the money-standard; while Boeckh
     (_Metrologie_, ch. 15) holds him to have further altered the
     weights and measures. For the former view there is clear support in
     Plutarch (_Solon_, c. 15), and for the latter in the lately
     recovered Aristotelian _Polity of Athens_ (c. 10). But when Messrs.
     Mitchell and Caspari, in their abridgment of Grote (p. 45), declare
     that the latter document makes clear that the coinage measure was
     solely for the promotion of trade, and entirely independent of the
     Seisachtheia (so also Bury, p. 183), they unduly stress the
     evidence. The document, which is hardly Aristotelian in structure,
     proceeds doubtfully on tradition and not upon record; and there may
     be some truth in the old view of Androtion (Plut. c. 15), that
     Solon only reduced the rate of interest while altering the
     money-standard. The point is really obscure. Cp. Abbott, _Hist. of
     Greece_, i, 407-8; Grote, ii, 472-76; Meyer, ii, 651-52; Cox, _Gen.
     Hist. of Greece_, 2nd ed. pp. 76-79. So far are we from exact
     knowledge that it is still a moot point whether the tenant
     _Hektemorioi_ or "Sixth-men" _paid_ or _received_ a sixth part of
     their total product. Cp. Mitchell and Caspari, abr. of Grote, p.
     14, _note_; Cox, _Gen. Hist. of Greece_, 2nd ed. p. 77; Bury,
     _Hist. of Greece_, ed. 1906, p. 181; Meyer, ii, 642; Abbott, _Hist.
     of Greece_, i, 289.

While the burdened peasants and labourers were thus ostensibly given a
new economic outlook on life, they were further humanised by being given
a share in the common polity. To the Ecclesia or "Congregation" of the
people Solon gave the power of electing the public magistrates; and by
way of controlling somewhat the power of the Areopagus or Senate, he
established a "pre-considering" Council or "Lower House" of Four
Hundred, chosen from all save the poor class, thus giving the State
"two anchors." And though the executive was in the hands of the
aristocracy, subject only to popular election, the burdens of the
community were soundly adjusted by a new or improved classification of
citizens according to their incomes ("timocracy"), which worked out
somewhat as a graduated income-tax, whether by way of a money-rate or in
respect of their share in military duties and public "liturgies," which
had to be maintained by the richer citizens.

     As to this vexed question, see Boeckh, _Staatsaushaltung der
     Athener_, B. iv, c. 5 (Grote's ref. wrong), as expounded and
     checked by Grote (ii, 485-88). Messrs. Mitchell and Caspari, in
     their abridgment of Grote (pp. 22, 49, _notes_), reject the whole
     interpretation (which is reached by a combination of ancient data,
     Plutarch [c. 18] telling nothing as to taxation). But they adduce
     only the negative argument that "as we know that Peisistratos, the
     champion of the poorer classes, subsequently levied a uniform tax
     of five or ten per cent., it is absurd to suppose that the highly
     democratic principle of a sliding-scale had been previously adopted
     by Solon. Peisistratos would not have dared to attempt a reaction
     from a sliding-scale income-tax to a sort of poll-tax." To this it
     might be replied that the "flat rate" of Peisistratos--which ought
     to modify the conception of him as the "friend of the poor"--may
     have been an addition to previous taxes; and that the division of
     citizens into income-classes must have stood for _something_ in the
     way of burdens. The solution would seem to be that these were not
     regular money taxes. "Regular direct taxes were as little known in
     free Athens as in any other ancient State; they are the marks of
     absolute monarchy, of unfreedom" (Meyer, ii, 644). "Seemingly, it
     was not until later times that this distribution of classes served
     the purposes of taxation" (Maisch, _Manual of Greek Antiquities_,
     Eng. tr. p. 40). But already the cost of certain public services,
     classed under the head of "liturgies," was laid upon the rich; and
     there may well have been a process of collective contribution
     towards these at a time when very rich citizens cannot have been
     numerous.

     Doubtless the graduated income-tax would have been unworkable in a
     systematic way, though in the "Servian" timocracy of early Rome a
     _tributum_ seems to have been imposed on the classes (Livy, ii, 9).

At yet other points Solon prepared the ground for the democratic
structure of the later Athenian polity. By overthrowing the sacrosanct
power of the aristocratic priestly houses, who had aggrandised
themselves by it like the nobles of early Rome, he prevented the growth
of a hierocracy. By constituting out of all the citizens, including the
Thetes or peasant cultivators, a kind of universal jury-court, out of
which the panels of judges were to be taken by lot, he put the people on
the way of becoming a court of appeal against the upper-class archons,
who recruited the Areopagus. "The constitution of the judicial courts
(_Heliaia_) out of the whole people was the secret of democracy which
Solon discovered. It is his title to fame in the history of the growth
of popular government in Europe."[106]

The whole reform was indeed a great achievement; and so far definitive
that from that time forward Athens needed no further resort to
"Seisachtheia" or to alteration of the money-standard. Solon had in fact
eliminated the worst disruptive force at work in the community--the
enslavement of the debtor; a reform so radical,[107] when considered as
one man's work, that to note its moral limits may seem to imply
blindness to its value. Henceforth, on the lines of the democracy which
he made possible, Athenians were so far homogeneous that their slaves
were aliens. Beyond that point they could not rise; after Solon, as
before, they were at daggers drawn with neighbouring Statelets, and to
the end it remained tolerable to them to enslave the men of other
Greek-speaking communities. Floated over the first reef by Solon, they
never found a pilot to clear the second--the principle of group-enmity.
Upon that the Hellenic civilisation finally foundered.

Even in respect of what he achieved, Solon received but a chequered
recognition in his own time. The peasantry had expected him to divide
the land among them;[108] and when they found that the abolition of
enslavement for debt did not mean much less stress of life, they were
ready to forfeit all the political rights he had given them for some
more tangible betterment.

The simple fact that a generation later Peisistratos was able to become
tyrant in the teeth of the aged Solon's vehement opposition is
intelligible only as standing for the feeling of many of the common
people that through a _tyrannos_ alone could their interests be
maintained against the perpetual conspiracy of the upper class to
overreach them.[109] It may be that Solon had alienated the rural folk
by his concern for commerce, which would be likely to mean the
encouragement of imports of food.[110] Peisistratos, we know, was the
leader of the _Diakrioi_, the herdsmen and crofters of the uplands, and
was "accounted the most thorough democrat" as against the landlords of
the plains (_Pediaioi_), led by Lycurgos, and the traders of the coast
(_Paraloi_), led by Megacles.[111] The presumption is that by this time
the fertile plain-lands were largely owned by rich men, who worked them
by hired labour; but the nature of the conflicting forces is not now to
be clearly ascertained. The credit given afterwards to Peisistratos for
maintaining the Solonian laws points to an understanding between him and
the people;[112] and their acceptance of him in Solon's despite suggests
that they even identified the latter with the failure of his laws to
secure them against further aristocratic oppression.

Nonetheless, Solon's recasting of the political structure of the State
determined the future evolution. As Athens grew more and more of an
industrial and trading city, her people reverted more and more surely to
the self-governing ideal; albeit the Solonian constitution preserved the
unity of the State, keeping all the people of Attica "Athenians." The
rule of Peisistratos was twice upset, and that of his house in all did
not last much above fifty years. When the last member was driven out by
Kleisthenes (510 B.C.), the constitution was re-established in a more
democratic form than the Solonian; all freemen of Attica became burghers
of Athens; and thousands of unenfranchised citizens and emancipated
slaves obtained full rights of citizenship. For better and for worse,
republican Athens was made--a new thing in the ancient world, for
hitherto "democratical government was a thing unknown in Greece--all
Grecian governments were either oligarchical or despotic, the mass of
the freemen having not yet tasted of constitutional privilege."[113]

What followed was an evolution of the old conflicting forces on a new
constitutional basis, the balance of power and prestige being on the
side of the demos and its institutions, no longer on that of a
land-owning and dominant aristocracy. But the strife never ceased.
Kleisthenes himself found "the Athenian people excluded from everything"
once more, and, "being vanquished in the party contest with his rival,
took the people into partnership."[114] The economic tendencies of all
civic life reproduced the hostility again and again. One of the most
remarkable of the laws of Solon was that which disfranchised any citizen
who in a "stasis" or seditious feud stood aloof and took no side.[115]
He had seen the risks of such apathy in the attempt of Kylon, in his
youth, to become despot of Athens; and his fears were realised when
Peisistratos seized power. The law may have helped to promote
public-spirited action; but in the nature of things it was hardly
necessary when once democracy was established. Again and again the demos
had to fight for its own hand against the cliques who sought to restore
oligarchy; and apathy was not likely to be common. The perpetual
generation of fresh poverty through rapid increase of population, and
the inevitable resort to innovating fiscal and other measures to relieve
it, sufficed to provide grounds of class strife while free Athens
endured.

It lies on the face of Aristotle's _Politics_, however, that even if the
population difficulty had been solved otherwise than by exodus, and even
if the Athenians could have guarded against class strife among
themselves, the fatality of war in the then civilised world would have
sufficed to bring about political dissolution. As he profoundly
observes, the training of a people to war ends in their ruin, even when
they acquire supremacy, because their legislators have not "taught them
how to rest."[116] Add the memorable testimony of Thucydides concerning
the deep demoralisation wrought by the Peloponnesian War--a testimony
supported by every page of the history of the time. Even the sinister
virtue of uniting a people within itself was lacking to the perpetual
warfare of the Greeks: the internal hatreds seemed positively to worsen
in the atmosphere of the hatreds of the communities. But while the
spirit of strife is universal, peoples are inevitably trained to war;
and even if the Greek States could have so far risen above their
fratricidal jealousies as to form a stable union, it must needs have
turned to external conquest, and so run the downward course of the
post-Alexandrian Hellenistic Empires, and of the Roman Empire, which in
turn sank to dissolution before the assaults of newer militarisms.


¤ 2

Nothing can save any democratic polity from the alternatives of insane
strife and imperial subjection but a vital prosperous culture, going
hand in hand with a sound economy of industry. The Greek democracies in
their different way split on the rock that wrecked the Roman Republic:
there was (1) no general mental development commensurate with the
political problems which arose for solution, and (2) there was no
approach to a sound economics. The first proposition will doubtless be
denied by those who, nourished on the literature of Greece, have come to
see in its relative excellence, the more confidently because of the
abiding difficulty of mastering it, the highest reach of the faculties
of thought and expression. But this judgment is fundamentally astray,
because of the still subsisting separation, in the literary mind, of the
idea of literary merit from the idea of scientific sanity. Men
themselves too often vowed to the defence and service of a mythology are
slow to see that it was not for nothing that the Athenian people
bottomed its culture to the last on myth and superstition. Yet a little
reflection might make it clear that the community which forced Socrates
to drink the hemlock for an alleged and unproved scepticism, and
Anaxagoras to fly for a materialistic hypothesis concerning the sun,
could have no political enlightenment adequate to the Athenian needs. We
see the superstitious Athenian demos playing the part of the ignorant
multitude of all ages, eager for a master, incapable of steadfast
self-rule, begging that the magnificent Alcibiades, who led the sacred
procession to Eleusis in despite of the Spartans near at hand, shall put
down his opponents and reign at Athens as king[117]--this after he had
been exiled by the same demos on a charge of profane parody of the
Eleusinian mysteries, and sacerdotally declared accursed for the
offence.[118] A primitive people may stumble along in primitive
conditions by dint of elementary political methods; but a civilised
people with a complex political problem can solve it only by means of a
correspondingly evolved science. And the Athenian people, with their
purely literary and ¾sthetic culture, never as a body reached even a
moderate height of ethical and scientific thought,[119] or even any such
general ¾sthetic well-being as we are apt to credit them with. Moderns
think of them, as the great song of Euripides has it, "lightly lifting
their feet in the lucid air,"[120] and are indulgently ready to take by
the letter the fine panegyric of the Athenian polity by Pericles,[121]
forgetting that statesmen in all ages have glorified their State, always
making out the best case, always shunning discouragement for their
hearers, and making little account of evil. But Burckhardt, after his
long survey, decides with Boeckh that "the Hellenes were more unhappy
than most men think;"[122] and the saying holds good of their political
and intellectual life above all things.

Our more idealising scholars forget that the philosophy of the
philosophers was a specialism, and that the chance of hearing a tragedy
of Sophocles or a comedy of Aristophanes was no training in political
conduct for a people whose greatest philosopher never learned to see the
fatality of slavery. On the economic side, Periclean Athens was nearly
as ill founded as aristocratic Rome. Citizens often with neither
professions nor studies, with no ballasting occupation for head or hand;
average men paid from the unearned tribute of allied States to attend to
affairs without any fundamental study of political conditions; citizens
whose work was paid for in the same fashion; citizens of merely
empirical education, for whom politics was but an endless web of
international intrigue, and who had no higher ideal than that of the
supremacy of their own State in Hellenedom or their own faction in the
State--such men, it is now easy to see, were incapable of saving Athens,
much less of unifying Greece. They were politically raised to a
situation which only wise and deeply instructed men could fill, and they
were neither wise nor deeply instructed, however superior their
experience might make them relatively to still worse trained
contemporaries, or to populations living under a systematic despotism.

On some of the main problems of life the majority had thought no further
than their ancestors of the days of the kings. The spell of religion had
kept them ignorant and superstitious.[123] In applied ethics they had as
a body made no progress: the extension of sympathy, which is moral
advance, had gone no further than the extortion of civic status and
power by some new classes, leaving a majority still enslaved. Above all,
they could not learn the lesson of collective reciprocity; could not see
the expediency of respecting in other communities the liberty they
prized as their own chief good. Athens in her turn "became an imperial
or despot city, governing an aggregate of dependent subjects all without
their own active concurrence, and in many cases doubtless contrary to
their own sense of political right.... But the Athenians committed the
capital fault of taking the whole alliance into their own hands, and
treating the allies purely as subjects, without seeking to attach them
by any form of political incorporation or collective meeting and
discussion--without taking any pains to maintain community of feeling or
idea of a joint interest--without admitting any control, real or even
pretended, over themselves as managers. Had they attempted to do this,
it might have proved difficult to accomplish--so powerful was the force
of geographical dissemination, the tendency to isolated civic life, and
the repugnance to any permanent extramural obligations, in every Grecian
community. But they do not appear to have ever made the attempt. Finding
Athens exalted by circumstances to empire, and the allies degraded into
subjects, the Athenian statesmen grasped at the exaltation as a matter
of pride as well as profit. Even Pericles, the most prudent and
far-sighted of them, betrayed no consciousness that an empire without
the cement of some all-pervading interest or attachment, although not
practically oppressive, must nevertheless have a natural tendency to
become more and more unpopular, and ultimately to crumble in
pieces."[124]

In fine, a democracy, the breath of whose nostrils is justice,
systematically refused to do as it would be done by; and as was Athens,
so were the rest of the Greek States. When the Athenians told the
protesting Melians, in effect, that might is right,[125] they did even
as Sparta and Thebes had done before them.[126] Hence the instinct of
justice was feeble for all purposes, and the domestic strife of factions
was nearly as malignant and animalised as in Borgian Italy. Mother
cities and their colonies fought more destructively with each other than
with aliens; Athens and Syracuse, Corinth and Corcyra, strove more
malignantly than did Greek with barbarian. It was their rule after a
victory to slay their prisoners.[127] Such men had not learned the
secret of stable civic evolution; animal instinct was still enthroned
against law and prudence. Unearned income, private and public; blindly
tyrannous political aggression; ferocious domestic calumny; civic and
racial disruption--these were the due phases and fruits of the handling
of a great political problem by men who in the mass had no ideals of
increasing knowledge, of growing tolerance, of widening justice, of
fraternity.[128] Stoic and Epicurean wisdom and righteousness came too
late to save free Hellas: they were the fruits of retrospect in
decadence. The very art and literature which glorified Athens were in
large part the economic products of impolicy and injustice, being
fostered by the ill-gotten wealth accruing to the city from her
tributary allies and subject States, somewhat as the art of the great
period in Italy was fed by the wealth of the Church and of the merchant
princes who grew by the great river of trade. In the one case as in the
other, there was no polity, no science, equal to the maintenance of the
result when the originating conditions disappeared. Greek art and
letters passed away because they were ill rooted. Nobly incorrupt for
himself, Pericles thus fatally fostered a civic corruption that no
leader's virtues could countervail, and his policy in this regard was
probably the great force of frustration to his scheme for a pan-Hellenic
congress at Athens, to promote free trade and intercourse.[129]

     For various views on this matter cp. Heeren, Eng. tr. of Researches
     on the _Political History of Ancient Greece_, pp. 129-34;
     Thirlwall, _History of Greece_, ch. xviii (1st ed. iii, 62-70);
     Grote, iv, 490-504; Abbott, _History of Greece_, i, 405-9; Holm,
     _History of Greece_, Eng. tr. ii, 268, note 8 to ch. xvii (a
     vindication). Grote, who vindicates the policy of Pericles with
     much care, endorses the statesman's own plea that his use of the
     confederate treasure in ennobling the city gave her a valuable
     prestige. But even to the Athenian opposition this answer was
     indecisive, for, as Grote records, the argument of Thucydides was
     that Athens was "disgraced in the eyes of the Greeks" by her use of
     the treasure. This meant that her prestige was fully balanced by
     hatred, so that the civic gain was a new danger.

Not that matters would have gone a whit better if, as our Tory
historians used retrospectively to prescribe, democracy had been
permanently subverted by aristocracy. No other ideal then in vogue would
have produced even so much "good life" as was actually attained. We know
that the rich and the great in the Greek cities were the worst citizens,
in the sense of being the least law-abiding; and that the lower-class
Athenians who served in the fleet were the best disciplined; the
middle-class hoplites less so; and the rich men who formed the cavalry
the least orderly of all.[130] Above all, the aristocrats were cruel and
rapacious when in power as the demos never were, even when they had
overthrown the guiltiest of their tyrants.[131] The leading aristocrats
were simply weaker versions of the demagogues, making up for their
weakness by their cruelty; and nothing can be more misleading than to
take the account given of Kleon by Aristophanes for even a semblance of
the truth. The great humorist saw nothing as it really was: his very
genius was as it were a many-faceted mirror that could reflect no whole,
and left his practical judgment worth less than that of any of the men
he ridiculed. Kleon is to be conceived as a powerful figure of the type
of a New York Tammany "Boss," without culture or philosophy, but shrewd,
executive, and abounding in energy. The aristocrats were but slighter
egoists with a varnish of education, as far as he from a worthy
philosophy. And the philosophers _par excellence_, Plato and Aristotle,
were equally incapable of practical statesmanship. The central truth of
the entire process is that free Greece fell because her children never
transcended, in conception or in practice, that primary ethic of egoism
in which even love for one's country is only a reflex of hate for
another people. This is clear in the whole play of the astounding
hatreds of Athenians for Athenians through every struggle of Athens for
her life. The treasons of Alcibiades are evoked and amply balanced by
the murderous plots of his fellows against him: every figure in the line
of leaders, from Solon's self, is hated by some hetairia; the honest
Anytus, the perfect type of brainless conservatism sitting in the chair
of sociological judgment, can be appeased only by the slaying of
Socrates; and to the end the egoisms of Demosthenes, ®schines, and
Isocrates are at grapple, with the national assassin in sight.

And it is the prevailing consciencelessness, the universal lust to
tyrannise, that really consummates the political dissolution. It was not
the battle of Ch¾ronea that made an end of Greek independence. That
disaster would have been retrieved like others if only the Greeks had
persistently cared to retrieve it. They fell because they took the bribe
of empire. Philip held it out at once by his offer of facile terms to
Athens: he was planning in his own way what the pragmatic Isocrates took
for the ideal Hellenic course, a Hellenic war of conquest against
Persia; and it was that very war, made by Alexander, that transformed
the Greeks into a mere diluvium of fortune-hunters, turning away from
every ideal of civic stability and dignity to the overrunning of alien
populations and the getting of alien gold. Given the process of historic
determination, moral bias becomes a fatality; and when it is fixed,
"'tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus." Republican Greece passed
away because there were no more republican Greeks, but only a rabble of
imperialists. Here again appears the fatality of their past: it was the
sombre memory of unappeasable civil strife, of eternal inequality and
envy and class attrition, that made the new promise so dazzling; any
future seemed fairer than the recent past. But it was through the
immediate bait to their cupidity that the Greeks were led out of their
old man-making life of turbulent counterpoise, the sphere of free
equals, into the new unmanning life of empire, the sphere of slaves.
They were easy victims. The men of Aristotle's day had once more before
their eyes, in the squalid drama of Philip's house--in the spectacle of
alienated wife and son deriding and hating the laurelled conqueror and
exulting in his murder--the old lesson of autocracy, its infallible
dishonour, its depravation, its dissolution of the inmost ties of
cordial life. But any countervailing ideal that still lived among them
was overborne by the tide of triumphant conquest; and, with Aristotle
and Plato in her hand, Greece turned back to the social ethic of the
Heraclid¾.

And when once the Circean cup of empire had been drained by the race,
there was no more returning to the status of republican manhood. The new
self-governing combination of cities which arose in Achaia after the
disintegration of Alexander's empire might indeed conceivably have
reached a high civilisation in time; but the external conditions, as
summed up in the existence of Rome, were now overwhelmingly
unfavourable. The opportunity for successful federalism was past. As it
was, the Achaian and ®tolian Leagues were but politic unions as much for
aggression as for defence, even as the Spartan reformers, Agis and
Cleomenes, could never rise above the ideal of Spartan self-assertion
and domination. Thus we have on one hand the Spartan kings, concerned
for the well-being of the mass of the people (always excepting the
helots) as a means to restore Spartan pre-eminence; and on the other
hand the Achaian federation of oligarchies, hating the doctrine of
sympathy for the demos as much as they hated Sparta--the forces of union
and strife always repelling the regimen of peace, to say nothing of
fraternity. The spectacle of Cleomenes and Philopoemen at deadly odds
is the dramatic summary of the situation; the ablest men of the later
Greek age could not transcend their barbarian heredity.

     The statement of Freeman (_History of Federal Government in Greece
     and Italy_, ed. 1893, p. 184) that a federal system in Greece was
     "utterly impossible," is true in the bare philosophic sense that
     that was impossible which did not happen; but such a proposition
     would hold equally true of anything else that did not happen at a
     given time; and it merely creates confusion to affirm it of one
     item in particular. Pericles schemed something like a federal
     union;[132] and had his practice been in accord with his ideal, it
     might conceivably have been at least tried. M. Fustel de Coulanges
     well points out how the primary religious conception of the ancient
     City-State expelled and negatived that of a composite State (_La
     CitŽ antique_, l. iii, ch. xiv, p. 239); that is a process of
     rational explanation. But unless we conceive the "failures" of the
     past as lessons to be profited by, there can be neither a social
     nor a moral science. Freeman, however, actually proceeds to say
     that Greek federation was utterly undesirable--an extraordinary
     doctrine in a treatise devoted to studying and advocating
     federalism. On the principles thus laid down, Dr. Freeman's
     denunciation of Austria and France in modern times is irrational,
     since that which has happened in these countries is that which
     alone was possible; and the problem as to the desirable is
     hopelessly obscured.

     To say that "Greece united in a federal bond could never have
     become the Greece" we admire (_id._ p. 184), is only to vary the
     verbalism. Granted that Hellenic greatness _as we know it_ was
     "inseparably limited to the system of independent city
     commonwealths," it remains a rational proposition that had the
     Greek cities federated they could have developed their general
     culture further than they actually did, though the special
     splendour of Periclean Athens could not in that case have been so
     quickly attained. And as the _fall_ of Greece is no less
     "inseparably linked" with the separateness of the States, Dr.
     Freeman's proposition suggests or implies an assertion of the
     desirableness of that fall. Mr. T. Whittaker, in his notable essay
     on _The Liberal State_ (1907, pp. 70-72), rightly puts it as a
     fatality of the Greek State that it could neither enter into nor
     absorb a larger community, but recognises this as a failure to
     solve the great problem. When, however, he writes that "the free
     development of Athens as an autonomous State would have been
     restricted by a real federation in which other States had a voice
     of their own," he partly sets up the difficulty created by Freeman.
     Wherein would Athens have suffered as to freedom?

The lesson for modern democracies from the story of the ancient is thus
clear enough. To flourish, they must have peace; they must sooner or
later practise a scientific and humane restraint of population--the
sooner the better, as destruction of surplus population is always going
on, even with emigration; they must check inequality, which is the
fountain of domestic dispeace; and they must maintain a progressive and
scientific culture. And the lesson is one that may now be acted on as it
never could have been before. There is no longer a reserve of fecund
barbarism ready to overwhelm a civilisation that ceases to be
pugnacious; and the civilised States have it in their own power to
submit their quarrels to bloodless arbitrament. The inveterate strifes
of the Greeks belong to a past stage of civilisation, and were in any
case the product of peculiar geographical conditions, Greece being
physically divided, externally among islands, and internally into a
multitude of glens, which in the days of City-State life and primitive
means of communication preserved a state of cantonal separateness and
feud, just as did the physical conditions of the Scottish Highlands in
the days before effective monarchic rule.

     This permanent dissociation of the City-States was only a more
     intractable form of the primary divisions of the districts. Thus in
     Attica itself the divisions of party largely followed the
     localities: "There were as many parties among them as there were
     different tracts of land in their country"--the mountain-dwellers
     being democratic, while the plain-dwellers were for an oligarchy,
     and the coast-dwellers sought a mixed government. (Plutarch,
     _Solon_, cc. 13, 29; Aristotle, _Polity of Athens_, c. 13.) See the
     question further discussed below, ch. iv, ¤ 2 (_c_).

Indeed, the fulness of the autonomous life attained by the separate
cities was a psychological hindrance to their political union, given the
primary geographical sunderance. Thus we have in the old Amphictyonic
councils the evidence of a measure of peaceful political attraction
among the tribes before the cities were developed;[133] yet on those
ancient beginnings there was no political advance till the rise of
formal federalism in the ®tolian and Achaian Leagues after the death of
Alexander. And that federalism was not ethically higher than the spirit
of the ancient Amphictyonic oath, preserved by ®schines. The balance of
the forces of separateness and political wisdom is to be conceived in
terms of a given degree of culture relatively to a given set of physical
conditions. Happily the deadlock in question no longer subsists for
civilised States.

Again, there is now possible a scientific control of population, without
infanticide, without vice, without abortion. There has been attained a
degree of democratic stability and enlightenment which given peace,
permits of a secure gradual extension of the principle of equality by
sound machinery. And there is now accumulated a treasury of seminal
knowledge which makes possible an endless intellectual progress, the
great antiseptic of political decay, provided only that the foregoing
conditions are secured. This is, in brief, the programme of progressive
democracy.
