



Chapter II

GREEK ECONOMIC EVOLUTION


¤ 1

In republican Greece, as in republican Rome, we have already seen the
tendency to the accumulation of wealth in few hands, as proved by the
strifes between rich and poor in most of the States. A world in which
aristocrats were finally wont to take an oath to hate and injure the
demos[233] was on no very hopeful economic footing, whatever its glory
in literature and art. Nor did the most comprehensive mind of all the
ancient world see in slavery anything but an institution to be defended
against ethical attack as a naturally right arrangement.[234] In view of
all this, we may reasonably hold that even if there had been no
Macedonian dominance and no Roman conquest, Greek civilisation would not
have gone on progressing indefinitely after the period which we now mark
as its zenith--that the evil lot of the lower strata must in time have
infected the upper. What we have here briefly to consider, however, is
the actual economic course of affairs.

For the purposes of such a generalisation, we may rank the Greek
communities under two classes: (1) those whose incomes, down through the
historic period, continued to come from land-owning, whether with slave
or free labour, as Sparta; and (2) those which latterly flourished
chiefly by commerce, whether with or without military domination, as
Athens and Corinth. In both species alike, in all ages, though in
different degrees as regards both time and place, there were steep
divisions of lot between rich and poor, even among the free. Nowhere,
not even in early "Lycurgean" Sparta, was there any system aiming at the
methodical prevention of large estates, or the prevention of poverty,
though the primitive basis was one of military communism, and though
certain sumptuary laws and a common discipline were long maintained.

     Grote's examination (pt. ii, ch. vi; ed. cited, ii, 308-30) of
     Thirlwall's hypothesis (ch. viii; 1st ed. i, 301, 326) as to an
     equal division of lands by Lycurgus, seems to prove that, as
     regards rich and poor, the legendary legislator "took no pains
     either to restrain the enrichment of the former or to prevent the
     impoverishment of the latter"--this even as regards born Spartans.
     As to the early military communism of Sparta and Crete, see Meyer,
     _Geschichte des Alterthums_, ii, ¤ 210; and as to the economic
     process see Fustel de Coulanges, _Nouvelles recherches sur quelques
     problmes d'histoire_, 1891, pp. 99-118.

Athens, on the other hand, was so situated as to become a place of
industry and commerce; and from about the time of her great land-crisis,
solved by Solon, her industrial and commercial interests determined her
economic development. It follows from the success of Peisistratos that
the mass of the people, blind to the importance of the political rights
conferred upon them, were conscious of no such betterment from Solon's
"shaking-off-of-burdens" as could make them averse to the rule of a
"tyrant" who even laid upon them a new tax. The solution may perhaps lie
in points of fiscal policy to which we have now no clear clue. Of Solon
it is recorded[235] that he made a law against the export of any food
produce of Attica save oil--the yield of the olive. This implied that of
that product only was there in his opinion a redundancy; and we have it
from the same source that he "saw that the soil was so poor that it
could only suffice for the farmers," and so "gave great honour to
trade," and "made a law that a son was not obliged to support his father
if his father had not taught him a trade."[236] Himself a travelled
merchant, he further recognised that "merchants are unwilling to
despatch cargoes to a country which has nothing to export"; and we are
led to infer that he encouraged on the one hand the export of
manufactures, _plus_ oil, and on the other the importation of corn and
other food. In point of fact, grain was already being imported in
increasing quantity from the recently colonised lands of Sicily and the
Crimea;[237] and if the imports were free or lightly taxed the inland
cultivators would have a local grievance in the depression of the prices
of their produce.

The town and coast-dwellers, on the other hand, found their account in
the carriage and development of manufactures--vases, weapons, objects of
art--which, with the oil, and latterly the wine export, bought them
their food from afar. Athens could thus go on growing in a fashion
impossible to an agricultural community on the same soil; and could so
escape that fate of shrinkage in the free class which ultimately fell
upon purely agricultural Sparta. The upshot was that, after as before
Solon, Athens had commercial interests among her pretexts for war, and
so widened the sphere of her hostilities, escaping the worst forms of
"stasis" in virtue of the expansibility of commerce and the openings for
new colonisation which commerce provided and widened. But colonisation
there had to be. Precisely by reason of her progressiveness, her
openness to the alien, her trade and her enterprise, Attica increased in
population at a rate which enforced emigration, while the lot of the
rural population did not economically improve, and the probable change
from corn-growing to olive-culture[238] would lessen the number of
people employed on the land. Even apart from the fact of the popular
discontent which welcomed the _tyrannis_ of Peisistratos, we cannot
doubt that Solon's plans had soon failed to exclude the old phenomena of
poverty. The very encouragement he gave to artisans to immigrate,[239]
while it made for the democratic development and naval strength of
Athens, was a means of quickening the approach of a new economic crisis.
And yet he seems to have recognised the crux of population. The
traditional permission given by the sage to parents to expose infants,
implicitly avows the insoluble problem--the "cursed fraction" in the
equation, which will not disappear; and in the years of the approach of
Peisistratos to power we find Athens sending to Salamis (about 570) its
first _kleruchie_, or civic colony-settlement on subject territory--this
by way of providing for landless and needy citizens.[240] It was the
easiest compromise; and nothing beyond compromise was dreamt of.

     [The statement that Solon by law permitted the exposure of infants
     is made by Malthus, who gives no authority, but is followed by
     Lecky. The law in question is not mentioned by Plutarch, and I do
     not find it noticed by any of the historians. It is stated,
     however, by Sextus Empiricus (_Hypotyp_. iii, 24) that Solon made a
     law by which a parent could put his child to death; and this
     passage, which is cited by Hume in his _Essay on the Populousness
     of Ancient Nations_, is doubtless Malthus's authority. Nothing
     nearer to the purpose is cited by Meursius in his monograph on
     Solon; but this could very well stand as a permission of
     infanticide, especially seeing that the practice is presumptively
     prehistoric. Petit writes: "Quemadmodum liberos tollere in patris
     erat positum potestate, ita etiam necare et exponere, idque, meo
     judicio, non tam moribus quam lege receptum fuit Athenis" (_Leges
     Attic¾_, fol. 219, ed. Wesseling, 1742). Grote (ii, 470, _note_)
     pronounces that the statement of Sextus "cannot be true, and must
     be copied from some untrustworthy authority," seeing that Dionysius
     the Halicarnassian (ii, 26) contrasts the large scope of the
     _patria potestas_ among the Romans with the restrictions which all
     the Greek legislators, Solon included, either found or introduced.
     Dr. Mahaffy (_Social Life in Greece_, 3rd ed. p. 165) believes "the
     notion of exposing infants from _economical_ motives not to have
     prevailed till later times" than the seventh century B.C., but he
     gives no reason for fixing any date. We may take it as certain that
     while the laws of Lycurgus, like the Roman Twelve Tables, enjoined
     or permitted the destruction of sickly or deformed infants, the
     general Greek usage allowed exposure. The express prohibition of it
     at Thebes (®lian, _Var. Hist._ ii, 7) implies its previous
     normality there and elsewhere (cp. however, Aristotle, _Pol._ vii,
     16); and the _sale_ of children by their (free) parents was further
     permitted, except in Attica (Ingram, _History of Slavery_, p. 16);
     while even there a freeman's children by a slave concubine were
     slaves.]

On the other hand, the laws even of Sparta, framed with a view to the
military strength of the State considered as the small free population,
were ultimately evaded in the interests of property-holding, till the
number of "pure Spartans" dwindled to a handful.[241] Under a system of
primogeniture, with a rigid severance between the upper class and the
lower, there could in fact be no other outcome. Here, apart from the
revolts of the helots and the chronic massacres of these by their lords,
which put such a stamp of atrocity on Spartan history,[242] the stress
of class strife seems to have been limited among the aristocracy, not
only by systematic infanticide, but by the survival of polyandry,
several brothers often having one wife in common.[243] Whether owing to
infanticide, or to in-breeding, or to preventives, families of three and
four were uncommon and considered large, and special privileges offered
to the fathers.[244] As always, such devices failed against the
pressures of the main social conditions. All the while, of course, the
_perioikoi_ and the enslaved helots multiplied freely; hence the policy
of specially thinning down the latter by over-toil[245] as well as
massacre. In other States, where the polity was more civilised, many
observers perceived that the two essential conditions of stability were
(_a_) absolute or approximate equality of property, and (_b_) restraint
of population, the latter principle being a notable reaction of reason
against the normal practice of encouraging or compelling marriage.[246]
Aristotle said in so many words that to let procreation go unchecked "is
to bring certain poverty on the citizens; and poverty is the cause of
sedition and evil";[247] and he cites previous publicists who had sought
to solve the problem. Socrates and Plato had partly contemplated it; and
the idealist, as usual, had proposed the more brutal methods;[248] but
Aristotle, seeing more clearly the population difficulty, perhaps on
that account is the less disposed towards communism.

     As medical knowledge advanced, it seems certain, the practice of
     abortion must have been generally added to that of infanticide in
     Greece, as later in Rome. See Aristotle, _Politics_, vii, 16;
     Plutarch, _Lycurgus_, c. 3; and Plato, _The¾tetus_, p. 149
     (Jowett's trans. iv, 202), as to the normal resort to abortion. The
     Greeks must have communicated to the Romans the knowledge of the
     arts of abortion, as they did those of medicine generally. But it
     does not appear that with all these checks population really fell
     off in Greece until after the time of Alexander. Before that time
     it may very well have fallen off in Athens when she lost her
     position as sovereign and tribute-drawing State. The tribute would
     tend to maintain a population in excess of the natural amount. Dr.
     Mahaffy (_Rambles and Studies in Greece_, 4th ed. p. 11--a passage
     not squared with the data in _Greek Life and Thought_, pp. 328,
     558) accepts the old view of a general and inexplicable
     depopulation. One of the _loci classici_ on that head, in the
     treatise _On the Cessation of Oracles_ (viii) attributed to
     Plutarch but probably not by him, is searchingly examined by Hume
     at the close of his essay _Of the Populousness of Ancient Nations_,
     and the critic comes to the conclusion that the extreme decay there
     asserted cannot have taken place. He was in all probability right
     in arguing that the number of slaves in Attica had been enormously
     exaggerated in the figures of Athen¾us (cp. Cunningham, _Western
     Civilisation_, i, 109, note). There is reason to conclude, however,
     that Hume was unduly incredulous on some points. Strabo (refs. in
     Thirlwall, viii, 460) had found an immense decay of population in
     Greece more than a century before Plutarch; and his details prove a
     process of shrinkage which must have lasted long. In any case, a
     relative depopulation took place after the conquests of Alexander,
     from the operation of socio-economic causes, which are indicated by
     Finlay (_History of Greece_, Tozer's ed. i, 15; cp. Mahaffy, _Greek
     Life and Thought_, p. 328, and _The Greek World under Roman Sway_,
     1890, p. 218). Broadly speaking, the Greeks went to lands where
     wealth was more easily acquired than in their own. Further
     depopulation took place under the Romans, partly from direct
     violence and deportation, partly from fiscal pressure, partly from
     the economic causes already noted.

Thirlwall, in his closing survey, proceeding on Polybius,[249]
confidently decides that the main cause of depopulation was domestic and
moral. Such a theory cannot be sustained. Polybius evidently had no
clear idea of the facts, since he asserts that "in our time" and
"rapidly" there took place in Greece a "failure of offspring" (or
"dearth of children"), which left cities desolate and land waste; and
goes on to ascribe it to habits of luxury, which either kept men from
marrying or made them refuse to rear more than a few of their children.
The whole theorem is haphazard. Cities and lands could not have been so
depopulated.[250] There must have been, in addition to slaughter, a
drain of population to lands where the conditions were more
advantageous. Nor is there any good reason for believing that
child-exposure had suddenly and immensely increased. Thirlwall says that
marriages were "unfruitful"; but this is not the statement of Polybius.
It is true that p¾derasty would count for much in lowering character;
but it had been common in Greece centuries before the time of Polybius,
and had not affected fecundity. As we have seen,[251] fecundity fell in
Sparta for other reasons.

As between Sparta and Athens, the main difference was that Athenian life
was for a long period more or less expansive, while that of Sparta, even
in the period of special vigour, was steadily contractive, as regarded
quantity and quality of "good life." At Sparta, as above noted, the
normal play of self-interest in the governing class brought about a
continuous shrinkage in the number of enfranchised citizens and of
those holding land, till there were only 700 of the former and 100 of
the latter--this when there were still 4,500 adult Spartans of "pure"
descent, and 15,000 Laconians capable of military service. Even of the
hundred landowners many were women, the estates having thus evidently
aggregated by descent through heiresses.[252] It mattered little that
this inner ring of rich became, after the triumph over Athens and in the
post-Alexandrian period, as luxurious as the rest of Greece:[253] the
evil lay not in the mode of their expenditure, but in the mode of their
revenue. Agis IV and his successor Cleomenes thought to put the
community on a sound footing by abolition of debts and forcible division
of the land; but even had Agis triumphed at home or Cleomenes maintained
himself abroad, the expedient could have availed only for a time.
Accumulation would instantly recommence in the absence of a scientific
and permanent system.

     Schemes for promoting equality had been mooted in Greece from an
     early period (see Aristotle, _Politics_, ii, 6, 7, 8). Thus,
     "Pheidon the Corinthian, one of the oldest of legislators, thought
     that the families and number of citizens ought to continue the
     same." Phaleas of Chalcedon proposed to keep fortunes and culture
     equal; and Hippodamus the Milesian had a system of equality for a
     State of 10,000 persons. Some States, too, put restraints on the
     accumulation of land. But, save for transient successes, such as
     that of Solon at Athens, and of the compromise at Tarentum (see
     Aristotle, v, 5; and MŸller, _Dorians_, Eng. tr. ii, 184-86), there
     was no adequate adjustment of means to ends, as indeed there could
     not be. Aristotle's own practical suggestions show the hopelessness
     of the problem.

In the commercial cities, where industry was encouraged and wealth
tended to take the form of invested capital, it could not readily get
into so few hands; and as commerce developed and the investments were
more and more in that direction, there would arise an idle rich class
which could be best got at by way of taxation. In such communities,
though the division and hostility of rich and poor were as unalterable
as in Sparta, there was more elasticity of adjustment; so that we see
maritime and trading communities like Heracleia and Rhodes maintaining
their oligarchic government, with vicissitudes, down into the Roman
period,[254] somewhat as Venice in a later age outlasted the other
chief republics of Italy. The ruin of Corinth, though indirectly
promoted by class strifes,[255] need not have occurred but for the Roman
overthrow.[256]

As regards Athens, it is necessary to guard against some misconceptions
concerning the life conditions even of the Periclean period. Public
buildings apart, it was not a rich or rich-looking city; on the
contrary, partly by reason of the force of democratic sentiment, its
houses were mostly mean, the well-to-do people presumably having their
better houses in the country, where the land was now mostly owned by
them. After the destruction of the city by Xerxes (480 B.C.), the first
need was felt to be its refortification on a larger scale, even
sepulchres as well as the remains of private houses being made to yield
materials for the walls.[257] At the same time the Pir¾us and Munychia
were walled on a still greater scale--the whole constituting a public
work of extraordinary scope, rapidly carried through by the co-operation
of the whole of the citizens. The further gradual rebuilding of the
city, as well as the fresh flocking of the foreign trading population to
the now safe Pir¾us, would help, with the public works of Pericles, to
set up the conditions of general prosperity which prevailed before the
Peloponnesian war.[258] According to Demosthenes, the public men of the
generation of Salamis had houses indistinguishable from those of
ordinary people, whereas in the orator's own day the statesmen had
houses actually finer than the public buildings.[259] This would be the
natural result of the control of the confederate treasure resulting from
the Athenian supremacy. But Dic¾archus belongs to the same period, and
his account represents the mass of the city as poor in appearance, the
houses small and with projecting stairways, and the streets
crooked.[260] We know further from Xenophon that there were many empty
spaces, some of them doubtless made by the customary destruction of the
houses of those ostracised. There was thus a considerable approach to a
rather straitened equality among the mass of the town-dwelling free
citizens, who, despite the meanness of their houses, had luxuries in the
form of the public baths and gymnasia.

Before Salamis, again, the revenue drawn from the leases of the silver
mines of Laurium had been equally divided among the enfranchised
citizens--an arrangement which had yielded only a small sum to each,
but which represented a notable adumbration of a communal system, with
the fatal implication of a basis in slavery.[261] The devotion of this
fund[262] to the building of a navy was the making of the Athenian
maritime power; whence in turn came the ability of Athens to extort
tribute from the allied States, and therewith to achieve relatively the
greatest and most effective expenditure on public works[263] ever
attempted by any government. It was this specially created demand for
and endowment of the arts and the drama that raised Athens to the
artistic and literary supremacy of the ancient world, and, by so
creating a special intellectual soil, prepared the ensuing supremacy of
Athenian philosophy.[264] But the Periclean policy of endowment went far
beyond even the employment of labour by the State on the largest scale;
it set up the principle of supplying something like an income to
multitudes of poorer free citizens--an experiment unique in history. The
main features of the system were: (1) Payments for service to the
members of the Council of Five Hundred; (2) payments to all jurors, an
order numbering some six thousand; (3) the _theorikon_ or allowance of
theatre money to all the poorer citizens; (4) regular payments to the
soldiers and sailors; (5) largesses of corn, or sales at reduced prices;
(6) sacrificial banquets, shared in by the common people; (7) the
sending out of "kleruchies," or bodies of quasi-colonists, who were
billeted on the confederate cities, to the number of five or six
thousand in ten years. Without taking the _a priori_ hostile view of the
aristocratic faction, who bitterly opposed all this--a view endorsed
later by Plato and Socrates--the common-sense politician must note the
utter insecurity of the whole development, depending as it did
absolutely on military predominance.[265] The mere cessation of the
expenditure on public works at the fall of Athens in the Peloponnesian
war was bound to affect class relations seriously; and parties, already
bitter, were henceforth more decisively so divided.[266]

In the second period of Athenian ascendency, after the fall of the
Thirty Tyrants and of Sparta, when the virtual pensioning of citizens
begun by Pericles had been carried to still further lengths,[267] we
find Xenophon, the typical Greek of culture and military experience,
proposing a financial plan[268] whereby Athens, instead of keeping up
the renewed practice of oppressing the confederate cities in order to
pay pensions to its own poorer citizens, should derive a sufficient
revenue from other sources. In particular he proposed (1) the
encouraging of foreigners to settle in the city in larger numbers, by
exempting them from military service and from all forms of public
stigma, and by giving them the waste grounds to build on. The taxes they
would have to pay as aliens would serve as revenue to maintain the
citizens proper. (2) A fund should be established for the encouragement
of trade which in some unexplained way should yield a high interest,
paid by the State, to all investors. (3) The State should build inns,
shops, warehouses, and exchanges, chiefly for the use of the foreigners,
and so further increase its revenue. (4) It should build ships for the
merchant trade, and charter them out upon good security. (5) Above all,
it should develop by slave labour the silver mines of Laurium, to the
yield of which there was no limit. The public, in fact, might there
employ thrice as many slaves as the number of citizens; and it should
further set about finding new mines.

We have here the measure of the Athenian faculty to solve the democratic
problem as then recognised. The polity of Pericles was bound to perish,
alike because it negated international ethics and because it had no true
economic basis. The comparatively well-meaning plan of Xenophon could
not even be set in motion, so purely fanciful is its structure. The
income of the poorer citizens is to come from the taxes and rents paid
by foreigners, and from mines worked by slave labour; the necessary army
of slaves has to be bought as a State investment. It is as if the Boers
of the Transvaal had proposed to live idly in perpetuity on the dues
paid by the immigrants, all the while owning all the mines and drawing
all the profits. It is hardly necessary to say, with Boeckh,[269] that
the thesis as to the yield of the mines was a pure delusion; and that
the idea of living on the taxation of foreigners was suicidal.[270] The
old method, supplemented perforce by some regular taxation of the
taxable citizens, and by the special exaction of "liturgies" or payments
for the religious festival drama and other public services from the
rich, was maintained as long as might be; industry tending gradually to
decay, though the carrying trade and the resumed concourse of foreigners
for a time kept Athens a leading city. Never very rich agriculturally,
the middle and upper classes had for the rest only their manufactures
and their commerce as sources of income; and as the manufactures were
mostly carried on by slave labour, and were largely dependent on the
State's control of the confederate treasure, the case of the poorer free
citizens must necessarily worsen when that control ceased. About 400
B.C. the Athenians had still a virtual monopoly of the corn trade of
Bosporus, on which basis they could develop an extensive shipping, which
was a source of many incomes; but even these would necessarily be
affected by the new regimen which began with the Macedonian conquest.

     The attempt of Boeckh (bk. i, ch. viii) to confute the ordinary
     view as to the poverty of the Attic soil cannot be maintained. (See
     above, p. 99.) Niebuhr (_Lectures on Roman History_, Eng. tr. 3rd
     ed. p. 264) doubtless goes to the other extreme in calling the
     Greeks bad husbandmen. Compare the contrary view of Cox, _General
     History_, 2nd ed. p. 4. But even good husbandry on a poor soil
     could not compete with the output of Bosporus and Egypt. And in the
     Peloponnesian war Attic agriculture sank to a low level (Curtius'
     _History_, Eng. tr. iv, 71; bk. v, ch. ii).

     As to the incomes made in the Bosporus corn-trade, cp. Grote, x,
     410, 412, 413. When it became possible thus to draw a revenue from
     investment, the Athenian publicists rapidly developed the
     capitalist view that the lending of money capital is the support of
     trade. See Demosthenes, as cited by Boeckh, bk. i, ch. ix.


¤ 2

In the economic readjustments, finally, which followed on the rise and
subdivision of the empire of Alexander, Greece as a whole took a
secondary place in the Hellenistic world, though Macedonia kept much of
its newly acquired wealth. While commerce passed with industry and
population to the new eastern cities, the remaining wealth of Greece
proper would tend to pass into fewer hands,[271] thus _pro tanto_
narrowing more than ever the free and cultured class, and relatively
enlarging that of the slaves.

     [Boeckh (bk. i, ch. viii) dwells on the variety of manufactures,
     and here gives a juster view than does Dr. Mahaffy, who (_Social
     Life in Greece_, 3rd ed. p. 406) oddly speaks of the lack of
     machinery as making "any large employment of hands in manufacture
     impossible." But the main manufacture, that of arms, was peculiarly
     dependent on the Athenian command of the confederate treasure; and
     it does not appear that the other manufactures were a source of
     much revenue till just before the period of political decline, when
     other causes combined to check Athenian trade. By that time the
     aristocratic class had weakened in their old prejudice against all
     forms of commerce (Mahaffy, as cited; Boeckh, as cited), which had
     hitherto kept it largely in the hands of aliens, this long after
     the time when, at Corinth and other ports, the ruling class had
     been constituted of the rich traders; and after the special efforts
     of Solon to encourage and enforce industry. Apart from this
     prejudice, which in many States put a political disability on
     traders, commerce had always been hampered by war and bad policy.
     Dr. Mahaffy (_Social Life_, p. 405) somewhat over-confidently
     follows Heeren and Boeckh in deciding that none of the Greek trade
     laws were in the interests of particular trades or traders; but
     even if they were not, they none the less hampered all commerce.
     Cp. Boeckh, bk. i, ch. ix. As Hume observed, the high rates of
     profit and interest prevailing in Greece show an early stage of
     commerce. Cp. Boeckh, bk. i, chs. ix, xxii.]

Those who had not shared in the plunder of Asia, to begin with, would
find themselves badly impoverished, for the new influx of bullion would
raise all prices. It is notable, on the other hand, that philosophy,
formerly the study of men with, for the most part, good incomes, and
thence always associated more or less with the spirit of
aristocracy,[272] was now often cultivated by men of humble status.[273]
The new rich then appear to have already fallen away somewhat from the
old Athenian standards; while the attraction of poorer men was
presumably caused in part by the process of endowment of the philosophic
schools begun by Plato in his will--an example soon followed by
others.[274] It is probable that as much weight is due to this economic
cause as to that of political restraint in the explanation of the
prosperity of philosophy at Athens at a time when literature was
relatively decaying.

The Roman conquest, again, further depressed Greek fortunes by absolute
violence, hurling whole armies of the conquered into slavery,[275] and
later setting up a new foreign attraction to the Greeks of ready wit and
small means. They presumably began to flock to Rome or Egypt or Asia
Minor as the conditions in Greece worsened; and that process in turn
would be promoted by the gradual worsening of the Roman financial
pressure. It is notable that a rebellion of Attic slaves occurred in 133
B.C., synchronously with the first slave-rising in Sicily--a proof of
fresh oppression all round.[276] The Romans had retained the Greek
systems of municipal government, and had begun by putting on light
taxes.[277] But these surely increased;[278] and the Mithridatic war, in
which Athens had taken the anti-Roman side, changed all for the worse.
Sulla took the city after a difficult siege, massacred most of the
citizens, and entirely destroyed the Pir¾us; whereafter Athens
practically ceased for centuries to be a commercial centre. Corinth,
which had been razed to the ground by Mummius, was ultimately
reconstructed by C¾sar as a Roman colony, and secured most of what
commerce Greece retained. Twenty years before, Pompey had put down the
Cilician pirates, a powerful community of organised freebooters that had
arisen out of the disbanding of the hired forces of Mithridates and
other Eastern monarchs on the triumph of the Romans, and was further
swelled by a large inflow of poverty-stricken Greeks. While it lasted,
it greatly multiplied the number of slaves for the Roman market by
simple kidnapping.

     [The great mart for such sales was Delos, which was practically a
     Roman emporium (Strabo, bk. xiv, c. v, ¤ 1). Mahaffy (_Greek World
     under Roman Sway_, p. 154) regards the pirates as largely
     anti-Roman, especially in respect of their sacking of Delos. But
     previously they sold their captives there; and Dr. Mahaffy (p. 7)
     recognises the connection. The pirates, in short, became anti-Roman
     when the Romans, who had so long tolerated them as slave-traders
     (as the rulers of Cyprus and Egypt had done before), were driven to
     keep them in check as pirates.]

Thus all the conditions deteriorated together; and the suppression of
the pirate state found Greece substantially demoralised, the prey of
greedy proconsuls, poor in men, rich only in ancient art and in wistful
memories. In the civil wars before and after C¾sar's fall, Greece was
harried by both sides in turn; and down to the time of Augustus
depopulation and impoverishment seem to have steadily proceeded under
Roman rule.[279] Every special contribution laid on the provinces by the
rulers was made an engine of confiscation; citizens unable to pay their
taxes were sold as slaves; property owners were forced to borrow at
usurious rates in the old Roman fashion; and the parasitic class of
so-called Roman citizens, as such free of taxation, tended to absorb the
remaining wealth.[280] This wealth in turn tended to take the shape of
luxuries bought from the really productive provinces; and the fatality
of the unproductive communities, lack of the bullion which they in a
double degree required, for the time overtook Greece very much as it
overtook Italy. Both must have presented a spectacle of exterior
splendour as regarded their monuments and public buildings, and as
regarded the luxury that was always tending to concentrate in fewer
hands, usurers plundering citizens and proconsuls plundering usurers;
but the lot of the mass of the people must have been depressed to the
verge of endurance if depopulation had not spontaneously yielded relief.
As it was, the Greek populations would tend to consist more and more of
the capitalistic, official, and parasitic classes on the one hand, and
of slaves and poor on the other.[281]

The general depopulation of subject Greece is thus perfectly
intelligible. The "race" had not lost reproductive power; and even its
newer artificial methods of checking numbers were not immeasurably more
active than simple infanticide or exposure had been in the palmy days.
In the ages of expansion the whole Hellenic world in nearly all its
cities and all its islands swarmed with a relatively energetic
population, who won from conditions often in large part unpropitious a
sufficiency of subsistence on which to build by the hands of slaves a
wonderful world of art. To these conditions they were limited by racial
hostilities; everywhere there was substantial though convulsive
equipoise among their own warring forces, and between those of their
frontier communities and the surrounding "barbarians." The conquest of
Alexander (heralded and invited by the campaign of the Ten Thousand) at
one blow broke up this equipoise: organised Greek capacity, once
forcibly unified, triumphed over the now lower civilisations of Egypt
and the East, and Greek population at once began to find its economic
level in the easier conditions of some of the conquered lands. They
flocked to Egypt and elsewhere in the Mediterranean basin as they do at
the present time, for similar economic reasons. Nothing could now
restore the old conditions; but the Roman conquest and tyranny forced on
the disintegration till Greece proper was but the glorious shell of the
life of the past, inhabited by handfuls of a semi-alien population,
grown in a sense psychically degenerate under evil psychic conditions.
In the lower strata of this population began the spread of Christianity,
passing sporadically from Syria to the Greek cities, as at the same time
to Egypt and Rome. A new conception of life was generated on the plane
that typified it.


¤ 3

It is a great testimony to the value of sheer peace that in the Roman
Empire of the second century, with an incurable economic malady, as it
were, eating into its nerve centres, and with no better provision for
the higher life than the schools of rhetoric and the endowments of the
Greek philosophic chairs, there was yet evolved a system of law and
administration which, even under the frightful chances of imperial
succession, sustained for centuries a vast empire, and imposed itself as
a model on the very barbarism that overthrew it. And it is this system
which connects for us the life conditions of Greece as the Romans held
it, with its artistic shell almost intact despite all the Roman
plunder,[282] and those of the strangely un-Hellenic Greek-speaking
world which we know as Byzantium, with its capital at Constantinople.

The economic changes in this period can be traced only with difficulty
and uncertainty; but they must have been important. The multiplication
of slaves, which was a feature of the ages of the post-Alexandrian
empires, the Roman conquest, and the Cilician pirate state, would
necessarily be checked at a certain stage, both in town and country, by
the continued shrinkage of the rich class. Agriculture in Greece, as in
Italy, could not compete with that of Egypt; and slave-farming, save in
special cultures, would not be worth carrying on. In the towns, again,
the manufactures carried on by means of slaves had also dwindled
greatly; and the small wealthy class could not and would not maintain
more than a certain number of slaves for household purposes. The records
of the religious associations, too, as we shall see, seem to prove that
men who were slaves in status had practical freedom of life, and the
power of disposing of part of their earnings; whence it may be inferred
that many owners virtually liberated their slaves, though retaining a
legal claim over them. In this state of things population would
gradually recover ground, albeit on a low plane. The type of poor
semi-Greek now produced would live at a lower standard of comfort than
had latterly been set for themselves by the more educated, who would
largely drift elsewhere; and a home-staying population living mainly on
olives and fish could relatively flourish, both in town and country. On
that basis, in turn, commerce could to some extent revive, especially
when Nero granted to the Greeks immunity from taxation.[283] We are
prepared then, in the second century, under propitious rulers like
Hadrian and the Antonines, to find Greek life materially improved.[284]
The expenditure of Hadrian on public works, and the new endowments of
the philosophic schools at Athens by the Antonines, would stimulate such
a revival; and the Greek cities would further regain ground as Italy
lost it, with the growth of cosmopolitanism throughout the Empire. While
domestic slavery would still abound, the industries in Athens under the
imperial rule would tend to be carried on by freedmen.

A further stimulus would come from the overthrow of the Parthian empire
of the Arsacid¾ by Artaxerxes, 226 A.C. The Arsacid¾, though often at
war with the Romans, still represented the Hellenistic civilisation,
whereas the Sassanid¾ zealously returned to the ancient Persian
religion, the exclusiveness of which would serve as a barrier to Western
commerce,[285] even while the cult of Mithra, Hellenised to the extent
of being specially associated with image-worship, was spreading widely
in the West. Commerce would now tend afresh to concentrate in Greece,
the Indian and Chinese trade passing north and south of Persia.[286] The
removal of the seat of government from Rome by Diocletian, greatly
lessening the Italian drain on the provinces, would still further assist
the Greek revival after the Gothic invasion had come and gone. Thus we
find the larger Greek world in the time of Constantine grown once more
so important that in the struggle between him and Licinius his great
naval armament, composed chiefly of European Greeks, was massed in the
restored Pir¾us. The fleet of Licinius, made up chiefly by Asiatic and
Egyptian Greeks, already showed a relative decline on that side of the
Empire's resources.[287] When, finally, Constantine established the new
seat of empire at Byzantium, he tended to draw thither all the streams
of Greek commerce, and to establish there, as the centre of the revenues
of the Eastern Empire, some such population as had once flourished in
Rome; with, however, a definite tendency to commerce and industry in the
lower class population as well as in the middle class. To the government
of this population was brought the highly developed organisation of the
later Pagan Empire, joined with an ecclesiastical system from which
heresy was periodically eliminated by the imperial policy, aided by the
positive intellectual inferiority of the new Greek-speaking species.
There was prosperity enough for material life; and the political and
religious system was such as to prevent the normal result of prosperity,
culture, from developing independently. The much-divided Greek world had
at last, after countless convulsions, been brought to a possibility of
quasi-inert equilibrium, an equilibrium which enabled it to sustain and
repel repeated and destructive irruptions of northern barbarism,[288]
and on the whole to hold at bay, with a shrunken territory, its
neighbouring enemies for a thousand years.


¤ 4

We have passed, then, through a twilight age, to find a new civilised
empire ruled on the lines of the old, but with a single, albeit
much-divided religion, and that the Christian, all others having been
extirpated not by persuasion but by governmental force, after the new
creed, adapting itself to its economic conditions, had secured for
itself and its poor adherents, mainly from superstitious rich women, an
amount of endowment such as no cult or priesthood possessed in the days
of democracy. This process of endowment itself originated, however, in
pagan practice; for in the days of substitution of emotional Eastern
cults for the simpler worships of early Hellas, there had grown up a
multitude of voluntary societies for special semi-religious,
semi-festival purposes--_thiasoi_, _eranoi_, and _orgeones_, all
cultivating certain alien sacrifices and mysteries, as those of
Dionysos, Adonis, Sabazios, Sarapis, Cotytto, or any other God called
"Saviour."[289] These societies, unlike the older Hellenic associations
of the same names[290] for the promotion of native worships, were freely
open to women, to foreigners, and even to slaves;[291] they were
absolutely self-governing; the members subscribed according to their
means; and we find them flourishing in large numbers in the age of the
Antonines,[292] when the old state cults were already deserted, though
still endowed. They represent, as has been said, the reappearance of the
democratic spirit and the gregarious instinct in new fields and in lower
strata when general and practical democracy has been suppressed. In some
such fashion did the Christian Church begin, employing the attractions
and the machinery of many rival cults. Its final selection and
establishment by the Empire represented in things religious a process
analogous to that which had forcibly unified the competing republics of
Greece in one inflexible and unprogressive organisation. Nothing but
governmental force could have imposed doctrinal unity on the chaos of
sects into which Christianity was naturally subdividing; but the power
of conferring on the State Church special revenues was an effective
means of keeping it practically subordinate.

The historian who has laid down the proposition that religious unity was
the cause of the survival of the Eastern Empire when the Western
fell,[293] has made the countervailing admission that between Justinian
and Heraclius there was an almost universal centrifugal tendency in the
Byzantine State, which was finally overcome only by "the inexorable
principle of Roman centralisation,"[294] at a time when it was nearly
destroyed by its enemies and its own dissentient forces.[295] Province
after province had been taken by the Persians in the East; Slavs and
Avars were driving back the population from the northern frontiers, even
harrying the Peloponnesus; discontent enabled Phocas to dethrone and
execute Maurice (602 A.C.); and Phocas in turn was utterly defeated by
the Persian foe; when Heraclius appeared, to check the continuity of
disaster, and to place the now circumscribed Empire on a footing of
possible permanence. But it is important to realise how far the economic
and external conditions conduced to his success, such as it was.
Hitherto the populace of Constantinople had been supported, like that of
imperial Rome, by regular allowances of bread to every householder,
provided from the tributary grain supplies of Egypt. The Persian
conquest of Egypt in the year 616 stopped that revenue; and the
emperor's inability to feed the huge semi-idle populace became a cause
of regeneration, inasmuch as the State was forcibly relieved of the
burden, and many of the idlers became available for the army about to be
led by the emperor against the menacing Persians. He was reduced,
however, to the expedient of offering to continue the supply on a
payment of three pieces of gold from each claimant, and finally to
breaking that contract; whereafter, on his proposing to transfer his
capital to Carthage to escape the discontent, the populace and the
clergy implored him to remain, and thus enabled him to exact a large
loan from the latter,[296] and to dominate the nobility who had hitherto
hampered his action. The victories of Heraclius over the Persians,
however, only left the eastern and Egyptian provinces to fall under the
Arabs; the first financial result of his successes having been to tax to
exasperation the recovered lands in order to repay the ecclesiastical
loan with usury; and the circumscribed Empire under his successors could
not, even if the emperors wished, resume the feeding of the mass of the
citizens. Constantinople, though still drawing some tribute from the
remaining provinces in Italy, was thus perforce reduced to a safe
economic basis, even as the people in general had been coerced into
united effort by the imminent danger from Persia.

From this time forward, with many vicissitudes of military fortune, the
contracted Byzantine State endured in virtue of its industrial and
commercial basis and its consequent maritime and military strength,
managed with ancient military science against enemies less skilled. The
new invention of "Greek fire," like all advances in the use of missiles
in warfare, counted for much; but the decisive condition of success was
the possession of continuous resources. Justinian, among many measures
of mere oppression and restriction, had contrived to introduce from the
far East the silk manufacture, which for the ancient and medieval
European world was of enormous mercantile importance. Such a staple,
and the virtual control of the whole commerce between northern and
western Europe and the East, kept Byzantium the greatest trading power
in Christendom until the triumph of the Italian republics. Even the
Saracen conquests in Asia and Africa did not seriously affect this
source of strength; for the Saracen administration, though often wise
and energetic, was in Egypt too often convulsed by civil wars to permit
of trade flourishing there in any superlative degree. The Byzantines
continued to trade with India by the Black Sea and Central Asian route;
and their monopolies and imposts, however grievous, were relatively
bearable compared with the afflictions of commerce under other powers.
As of old, the Greeks or Greek-speaking folk were the traders of the
Mediterranean, the Saracen navy never reaching sufficient power to check
them; and when finally its remnants took to piracy, they served rather
to cut off all weaker competition than to affect the preponderating
naval power of the Empire.

In this period of prevailing commercial vigour, from the sixth to the
eleventh century, the life of the Greek Empire was substantially civic,
the rural districts remaining desolate, and agriculture extremely
feeble,[297] though the Sclavonian immigrants who now inhabited the
Peloponnesus[298] must have lived by that means. Under such
circumstances the towns would be fed by imported grain, presumably that
of the Crimea; but as they did not grow in size, at least in the case of
the capital, their industrial prosperity must have largely depended on
the restriction of population, whether by vice, preventive checks,
misery, or the sheer unhealthiness of city life, which at the present
day prevents so many Eastern cities from maintaining themselves save by
influx from the country.[299] It is misleading to point to the legal
veto on infanticide as a great Christian reform without taking these
things into account. The presumption is that misery, vice,
child-exposure, and abortion, rather than prudence, kept the poor
population within the limits of subsistence.

     Mr. Oman (_Byzantine Empire_, p. 145) takes the popular view as to
     the reformative effect of Christianity. He goes on to describe
     Constantine as providing for the children of the destitute to
     prevent their exposure, but does not mention that the same thing
     had been done under the Antonines, and that Constantine permitted
     the finder of an exposed child to enslave it. The punishment of all
     exposure as infanticide, under Valentinian, was only an adoption of
     the pagan practice at Thebes (®lian, _Var. Hist._ ii, 7). But in
     spite of all enactments, under Christian as under pagan rule,
     exposure and positive infanticide continued, though Christian
     sentiment never gave it the toleration exhibited in the drama of
     Menander. As to the historic facts, cp. Lecky, _Hist. of European
     Morals_, 6th ed. ii, 24-33.

     Broadly speaking, it was inevitable that in such a population as is
     pictured for us by Chrysostom--a multitude profoundly ignorant,
     superstitious, excitable, sensuous--all the vices of the
     Gr¾co-Roman period should habitually flourish, while poverty must
     have been normally acute after the stoppage of regular free bread.
     On the general moral environment, cp. the author's _Short History
     of Freethought_, 2nd ed. i, 249-50.

It is necessary, in the same way, to substitute an accurate for a
conventional view as to the treatment of slaves under the Christian
Empire. We are still told[300] that the Christian doctrine or
implication of religious equality had the effect first of greatly
modifying the evils of slavery and finally of abolishing it. Research
proves that the facts were otherwise. We have already seen how economic
causes partially limited slavery before Christianity was heard of; and
in so far as the limitation was maintained,[301] the efficient causes
remain demonstrably economic.[302] Indeed, no other causes can be shown
to have existed. Not only is slavery endorsed in the Gospels,[303] and
treated by Paul as not merely compatible with but favourable to
Christian freedom on the part of the slave,[304] but the early
Christians, commonly supposed to have been the most incorrupt, held
slaves as a matter of course.[305] In the laws of Justinian not a word
is said as to slavery being opposed to either the spirit or the letter
of Christianity; and the only expressions that in any degree deprecate
it are in terms of the Stoic doctrine of the "law of nature,"[306] which
we know to have been already current in the time of Aristotle,[307] and
to have become widespread in the age of the Antonines, under Stoic
auspices. That "law of nature," however, was never allowed to override a
definite law of society; and the Christian influence on the other hand
set up a new set of arguments for slavery.[308] Among the Christian
Visigoths, slaves who married without authority from their masters were
forcibly separated; and the slave who dared to marry a free-woman was
burnt alive with his wife; while "the bishops were among the largest
slave-holders in the realm; and baptised Christians were bought and sold
without a blush by the successors of St. Paul and Santiago."[309] It
cannot even be said of the Byzantines, any more than of the Protestants
of the southern United States of fifty years ago, that they were more
humane to their slaves than the earlier pagans had been; for we find
Christian Byzantine matrons causing their slave-girls to be tied up and
brutally flogged;[310] even as we have the testimony of Salvian to the
atrocities committed by Christian slave-owners in Gaul.[311] The
admission that the Church, even when encouraging laymen to free their
slaves, insisted on retaining its own,[312] is the proof that the urging
force was not even then doctrinal, but the perception that the Church's
secular interests were served by the growth of an independent population
outside its own lands.[313] The spirit of the Justinian code, despite
its allusion to the law of nature, and the spirit of the enactments of
the early Councils of the Church, are alike opposed to any idea of
spiritual equality between bond and free.

On the other hand, the simple restriction of conquest limited the
possibilities of slavery for Byzantium. Captives were enslaved to the
last,[314] but of these there was no steady supply. In the rural
districts, again, the fiscal conditions made for at least nominal
freedom, as is shown by the historian who has most closely analysed the
conditions:--

     "The Roman financial administration, by depressing the higher
     classes and impoverishing the rich, at last burdened the small
     proprietors and cultivators of the soil with the whole weight of
     the land-tax. The labourer of the soil then became an object of
     great interest to the treasury, and ... obtained almost as
     important a position in the eyes of the fisc as the landed
     proprietor himself. The first laws which conferred any rights on
     the slave are those which the Roman government enacted to prevent
     the landed proprietors from transferring their slaves, engaged in
     the cultivation of lands assessed for the land-tax, to other
     employments which, though more profitable to the proprietor of the
     slave, would have yielded a smaller or less permanent return to the
     imperial treasury.[315] The avarice of the imperial treasury, by
     reducing the mass of the free population to the same degree of
     poverty as the slaves, had removed one cause of the separation of
     the two classes. The position of the slave had lost most of its
     moral degradation, and [he] occupied precisely the same political
     position in society as the poor labourer from the moment that the
     Roman fiscal laws compelled any freeman who had cultivated lands
     for the space of thirty years to remain for ever attached, with his
     descendants, to the same estate.[316] The lower orders were from
     that period blended into one class; the slave rose to be a member
     of this body; the freeman descended, but his descent was necessary
     for the improvement of the great bulk of the human race, and for
     the extinction of slavery. _Such was the progress of civilisation
     in the Eastern Empire._ The measures of Justinian which, by their
     fiscal rapacity, tended to sink the free population to the same
     state of poverty as the slaves, really prepared the way for the
     rise of the slaves _as soon as any general improvement took place
     in the condition of the human race_."[317]

For the rest, it cannot be supposed that the "freedom" thus constituted
had much actuality. Sons of soldiers and artisans were held bound to
follow their father's profession, as in the hereditary castes of the
East,[318] and none of the fruits of freedom are to be traced in
Byzantine life. Still, the fact remains that the commercial and
industrial life sustained the political, and that the political began
definitely to fail when the commercial did. Constantinople could hardly
have collapsed as it did before the Crusaders if its commerce had not
already begun to dwindle through interception by Venice and the Italian
trading cities. As soon as these were able to trade directly with the
East they did so, thus withdrawing a large part of the stream of
commerce from Byzantium; and when, finally, they acquired the secret of
her silk manufacture, her industrial revenue was in turn undermined. On
the economic weakening, the political followed; and the Eastern Empire
finally fell before the Turks, very much as the Western had fallen
before the Goths.
