







CHAPTER I

ROMAN ECONOMIC EVOLUTION


By singling out one set of the forces of aggregation and disintegration
touched on in the foregoing general view, it is possible to get a more
concrete idea of what actually went on in the Roman body politic. It is
always useful in economic science, despite protests to the contrary, to
consider bare processes irrespectively of ethical feeling; and the
advantage accrues similarly in the "economic interpretation of
history."[160] We have sufficiently for our purpose considered Roman
history under the aspects of militarism and class egoism: it remains to
consider it as a series of economic phenomena.

     This has been facilitated by many special studies. Gibbon covers
     much of the ground in chapters 6, 14, 17, 18, 29, 35, 36 and 41;
     and Professor Guglielmo Ferrero sheds new light at some points in
     his great work, _The Greatness and Decline of Rome_ (Eng. trans. 5
     vols. 1907-1911), though his economics at times calls for revision.
     Cp. Alison on "The Fall of Rome," in _Essays_, 1850, vol. iii (a
     useful conspectus, though flawed by some economic errors);
     Spalding's _Italy and the Italian Islands_, 3rd ed. 1845, i,
     371-400; Dureau de la Malle, _ƒconomie politique des Romains_,
     1840, t. ii; Robiou et Delaunay, _Les Institutions de l'ancienne
     Rome_, 1888, vol. iii, ch. 1; Fustel de Coulanges, _Le Colonat
     romain_, etc.; Finlay, _History of Greece from its Conquest by the
     Romans_, ed. 1877, ch. i, ¤¤ 5-8; Long, _Decline of the Roman
     Republic_, vol. i, 1864, chs. xi, xii, xx (a work full of sound
     criticism of testimonies); W.T. Arnold, _Roman Provincial
     Administration_, 1879; Brooks Adams, _The Law of Civilisation and
     Decay_, 1897, ch. i; and Dr. Cunningham's _Western Civilisation_,
     vol. i, 1899. Among many learned and instructive German treatises
     may be noted the Preisschrift of R. Pšhlmann, _Die Uebervšlkerung
     der antiken GrossstŠdte_, Leipzig, 1884. Special notice is due to
     the recent work of W.R. Patterson, _The Nemesis of Nations_,
     1907--a valuable study of slavery.

As we have first traced them, the Romans are a cluster of agricultural
and pastoral tribes, chronically at war with their neighbours, and
centring round certain refuge-fortresses on one or two of the "Seven
Hills." Whether before or after conquest by monarchic Etruscans, these
tribes tended normally to fall into social grades in which relative
wealth and power tended to go together. The first source of subsistence
for all was cattle-breeding and agriculture, and that of the richer was
primarily slave labour, a secondary source being usury. Slaves there
were in the earliest historic times. But from the earliest stages wealth
was in some degree procured through war, which yielded plunder in the
form of cattle,[161] the principal species of riches in the ages before
the precious metals stood for the command of all forms of wealth. Thus
the rich tended to grow richer even in that primitive community, their
riches enabling them specially to qualify themselves for war, so getting
more slaves and cattle, and to acquire fresh slave labour in time of
peace, while in time of war the poor cultivator ran a special risk of
being himself reduced to slavery at home, in that his farm was untilled,
while that of the slave-owner went on as usual.[162] Long before the
ages described as decadent, the lapse of the poor into slavery was a
frequent event. "The law of debt, framed by creditors, and for the
protection of creditors, was the most horrible that has ever been known
among men."[163] When the poorer cultivator borrowed stock or seed from
the richer, he had first to pay a heavy interest; and when in bad years
he failed to meet that liability he could be at once sold up and finally
enslaved with his family, so making competition all the harder for the
other small cultivators. As against the plainly disintegrating action of
such a system, however, wars of conquest and plunder became to some
extent a means of popular salvation, the poorer having ultimately their
necessary share in the booty, and, as the State grew, in the conquered
lands. Military expansion was thus an economic need.

In such an inland community, commerce could grow but slowly, the
products being little adapted for distant exchange. The primitive
prejudice of landholders against trade, common to Greece and Rome, left
both handicraft and commerce largely to aliens and pariahs.[164] The
traders, as apart from the agriculturists and vine-and olive-growers,
would as a rule be foreigners, "non-citizens," having no political
rights; and their calling was from the first held in low esteem by the
richer natives, were it only because in comparison it was always apt to
involve some overreaching of the agriculturist,[165] which as between
man and man could be seen to be a bad thing by moralists who had no
scruples about usury and enslavement for debt. And as the scope of the
State increased from age to age, the patrician class found ready to its
hand means of enrichment which yielded more return with much less
trouble than was involved in commerce. The prejudice against trade was
no bar to brigandage.

On the other hand, the first practical problem of all communities,
taxation, was intelligently faced by the Roman aristocracy from the
outset. The payment of the _tributum_ or occasional special tax for
military purposes was a condition of the citizen franchise, and so far
the patricians were all burdened where the unenfranchised plebeians were
not. But this contribution "was looked upon as a forced loan, and was
repaid when the times improved."[166] And there were other
compensations. The use of the public pastures (which seem at one time to
have been the sole source of the State's revenue[167]), and the
cultivation of public land, were operations which could be so conducted
as to pay the individual without paying the State. It is clear that
frauds in this connection were at all times common: the tithes and rents
due on the _ager publicus_ were evaded, and the land itself appropriated
wherever possible by the more powerful, though still called public
property.[168] "The poorer plebeian, therefore, always strove to have
conquered lands divided, and not kept as _ager publicus_; while the
landless men who got allotments at a distance were inclined to regard
their migration as an almost equal grievance. If the rich men, they
argued, had not monopolised the public pastures with their herds, and
treated the lands which they leased at a nominal rental as their own,
there would have been enough land at home to divide among those who had
been ruined while serving their country in arms."[169]

But as the sphere of conquest widened, another economic phase
supervened. Where newly conquered territory was too distant to tempt any
save the poorest citizens, or to be directly utilised by the rich, it
could still be made _ager publicus_ and rented to its own inhabitants;
and the collection of this and other exactions from subject provinces
gradually grew to be a main source of Roman wealth. For the mere
cattle-looting of the early days there was substituted the systematic
extortion of tribute. "In antiquity conquest meant essentially the power
to impose a tribute upon the conquered";[170] and "until the time of
Augustus the Romans had maintained their armies by seizing and
squandering the accumulated [bullion] capital hoarded by all the nations
of the world."[171] Meanwhile the upper classes were directly or
indirectly supported by the annual tribute which from the time of the
conquest of Greece was drawn solely from the provinces. Paulus Emilius
brought from the sack of Hellas so enormous a treasure in bullion, as
well as in objects of art, that the exaction of the _tributum_ from
Roman citizens, however rich, was felt to have become irrational; and
henceforth, until Augustus re-imposed taxation to pay his troops, Italy
sponged undisguisedly on the rest of the Empire.[172] C¾sar's
expeditions were simply quests for plunder and revenue; and the reason
for his speedy retreat from Britain, for which there have been framed so
many superfluous explanations, is plainly given in the letter of Cicero
in which he tells of the news sent him from Britain by his brother--"no
hope of plunder."[173] But the supreme need was a regular annual
tribute, preferably in bullion, but welcome as corn. On the one hand the
exacted revenue supported the military and the bureaucracy; on the other
hand, the business of collecting taxes and tribute was farmed out in the
hands of companies of _publicani_, mainly formed of the so-called
knights, the _equites_ of the early days; in whose hands rich senators,
in defiance of legal prohibition, placed capital sums for
investment,[174] as they had previously used foreigners, who were free
to take usury where a Roman was not. Of such money-makers Gallia
Provincia was already full in the days of Cicero.[175] Roman
administration was thus a matter of financially exploiting the Empire in
the interest of the Roman moneyed classes;[176] and the ruthless skill
with which the possibilities of the situation were developed is perhaps
even now not fully realised. The Roman financier could secure a tribute
upon tribute by lending to a subject city or State the money demanded of
it by the government, and charge as much interest on the loan as the
borrowers could well pay. We know that the notoriously conscientious
Brutus, of sacred memory, thus lent, or backed a friend who lent, money
to tribute-payers at 48 per cent., or at least demanded 48 per cent. on
his loans, and sought to use the power of the executive to extort the
usury.[177]

All this, we are to remember, went on without any furtherance of total
domestic wealth-production. When corn-growing fell off, irrecoverably
depressed by the unearned import from the richer soils of tributary
provinces, there was a transference, partly economic, partly luxurious,
of agricultural labour to vine-and olive-culture, and a wholesale
turning of arable land to pasture. Some export of wine and olives
followed, though the rich Romans tended to drink the wines of Greece.
But Italy had ceased to be self-supporting. The produce she imported was
far in excess of her power of export;[178] so that in sheer
factitiousness the revenue of Rome is without parallel in history.
Modern England, which has grown rich by burning up its coal in
manufacture or selling it outright, but in the process has acquired a
share in the national and municipal debts of all other countries--England
is stable in comparison. While it lasts, the coal educes manufactures,
which also earn imports and constitute loans. So with the recent
exploitation of German iron; though in that case there has been much
of sheer national waste in the wholesale export of iron at "dumping"
prices in times of trade depression. But the history of Rome
was a progressive paralysis of Italian production; and the one way in
which the administration can be said to have counteracted the
process--as apart from the spontaneous resort to vine-and olive-culture
and to slave manufactures--was by forcing more-or-less unprofitable
mining for gold and silver wherever any could be got, thus giving what
stimulus can be given to demand by the mere placing of fresh bullion on
the market. Roman civilisation was thus irrevocably directed to an
illusory end, with inevitably fatal results. Bullion had come to
standfor public wealth, and wars were made for mines as well as for
tribute, Spain in particular being prized for her mining resources. As a
necessary sequence, therefore, copper money was ousted by silver (B.C.
269), and silver finally, after a long transition period, by gold, about
the time of Severus.[179] The silver had been repeatedly debased when
the treasury was in difficulties;[180] and in the later days of the
Empire it seems to have been base beyond all historic parallel,[181]
though a large revenue was extorted till the end. Between revenue and
tax-farming profits and the yield of the mines, the Roman moneyed class
must indeed have spent a good deal, so long as the tributaries were not
exhausted. But their economic demand was mainly for--(_a_) foods,
spices, wines, cloths, gems, marbles, and wares produced by the more
prosperous provinces; (_b_) expensive forms of food, fish, and fowl,
raised chiefly on the estates run by their own class; (_c_) some wares
of home production; and (_d_) _services_[182] from artists, architects,
master craftsmen, slaves, mimes, parasites, and meretrices, whose
economic demand in turn would as far as possible go in the same
directions.

As for the mass of the town people, slave or free, which ought on
common-sense principles to have been employed either in industry or on
the land, it was by a series of hand-to-mouth measures on the part of
the government, and by the operation of ordinary self-interest on the
part of the rich class, made age by age more unproductive industrially
and more worthless politically. Despite such a reform as the Licinian
law of 367 B.C.,[183] which for a time seems to have restored a yeoman
class to the State and greatly developed its fighting power, the forces
of outside competition and of capitalism gradually ousted the yeomen
cultivators all over Italy, leaving the land mainly in the hands of the
patricians and financiers of the city, who exploited it either by slave
labour or by grinding down the former cultivators as tenants. Even on
this footing, a certain amount of industry would be forced on the towns.
But not only was that also largely in the hands of slave-masters, with
the result that demotic life everywhere was kept on the lowest possible
plane: the emperors gradually adopted on humane grounds a policy which
demoralised nearly all that was left of sound citizenship.

As of old, monarchy in the hands of the more rational and conscientious
men tended to seek for the mass of the people some protection as against
the upper class; and the taxes and customs laid on by Augustus, to the
disgust of the Senate, were an effort in this direction. But this was
rather negative than positive protection, and the effort inevitably went
further. In the last rally of what may be termed conscientious
aristocratic republicanism, such as it was, we find Caius Gracchus, as
tribune, helping the plebs by causing grain to be sold at a half or a
fourth of its market value--an expedient pathetically expressive of the
hopeless distance that then lay between public spirit and social
science. Both of the Gracchi sought by violent legal measures to wring
the appropriated public lands from the hands of the rich, with the
inevitable result of raising against themselves a host of powerful
enemies. The needed change could not be so effected. But even if it had
been, it could not have endured. The Greek advisers of Tiberius
Gracchus, Blossius of Cum¾ and Diophanes of Mitylene,[184] looked solely
to redistribution, taking for granted the permanence of slavery, the
deadliest of all inequalities. The one way, if there were any, in which
the people could be saved was by a raising of their social status; and
that was impossible without an arrest of slavery and a cessation of
extorted tribute. But no Roman thinker save the Gracchi and their
predecessors and imitators seems ever to have dreamt of the former, and
no one contemplated the latter remedy. Least of all were the Roman
ruling class likely to think of either; and though Tiberius Gracchus did
avowedly seek to substitute free for slave labour,[185] and wrought to
that end; and though Caius Gracchus did in his time of power employ a
large amount of free labour on public works, one such effort counted for
nothing against the normal attitude of the patriciate. In order to fight
the Senate he had to conciliate the _publicani_ and money-lenders as
well as the populace, and the reforms of the two brothers came to
nothing.[186]

There is no record that in the contracts between the treasury and the
companies of _publicani_ any stipulation was ever made as to their
employing free labour, or in any way considering the special needs of
the populations among whom they acted.[187] Thus a mere cheapening of
bread could do nothing to aid free labour as against capitalism using
slaves. On the contrary, such aids would tend irresistibly to multiply
the host of idlers and broken men who flocked to Rome from all its
provinces, on the trail of the plunder. Industrial life in Rome was for
most of them impossible, even were they that way inclined;[188] and the
unceasing inward flow would have been a constant source of public danger
had the multitude not been somehow pacified. The method of free or
subsidised distribution of grain,[189] however, was so easy a way of
keeping Rome quiet, in the period of rapidly spreading conquest and
mounting tribute, that in spite of the resistance of the moneyed
classes[190] it was adhered to. Sulla naturally checked the practice,
but still it was revived; and C¾sar, after his triumph in Africa, found
the incredible number of 320,000 citizens in receipt of regular doles of
cheapened or gratis corn. He in turn, though he had been concerned in
extending it,[191] took strong measures to check the corrosion, reducing
the roll to 150,000;[192] but even that was in effect a confession that
the problem was past solution by the policy, so energetically followed
by him, of re-colonising in Italy, Corinth, Carthage, Spain, and Gaul.
And if C¾sar sought to limit the gifts of bread, he seems to have
outgone his predecessors in his provision of the other element in the
popular ideal--the circus; his shows being bloodier as well as vaster
than those of earlier days.[193] A public thus treated to sport must
needs have cheap food as well.

Of this policy, the economic result was to carry still further the
depression of Italian agriculture. The corn supplied at low rates or
given away by the administration was of course bought or taken in the
cheapest markets--those of Sardinia and Sicily, Egypt, Africa, and
Gaul--and importation once begun would be carried to the utmost lengths
of commercialism. Italian farms, especially those at a distance from
the capital,[194] could not compete with the provinces save by still
further substituting large slave-tilled farms for small holdings, and
grinding still harder the face of the slave. When finally Augustus,[195]
definitely establishing the system of lowered prices and doles,
subsidised the trade in the produce of conquered Egypt to feed his
populace, and thus still further promoted the importation of the
cheapest foreign grain, the agriculture of a large part of Italy, and
even of parts of some provinces, was practically destroyed.

     It has been argued by M'Culloch (_Treatises and Essays: History of
     Commerce_, 2nd ed. p. 287, _note_) that it is impossible that the
     mere importation of the corn required to feed the populace--say a
     million quarters or more--could have ruined the agriculture of
     Italy. This expresses a misconception of what took place. The doles
     were not universal, and the emperors naturally preferred to limit
     themselves as far as possible to paying premiums for the
     importation and cheap sale of corn. (Cp. Suetonius, _Claudius_, c.
     19, and the Digest, iii, 4, 1; xiv, i, 1, 20; xlvii, ix, 3, 8; l,
     v, 3, etc.) All of the conquered provinces, practically, had to pay
     a tithe of their produce; and where corn was specially cheap it
     would be likely to come to Rome in that form. (Cp. Dureau de la
     Malle, _ƒcon. polit. des Romains_, ii, 424 _sq._) Many of the
     patrician families, besides, owned great estates in Africa, and
     they would receive their revenues in produce. Egyptian, Sardinian,
     Sicilian, and African corn could thus easily undersell Italian for
     ordinary consumption. For the rest, the produce of Egypt would be a
     means of special revenue to the emperor. Cp. M'Culloch's own
     statement, p. 291.

     Prof. Ferrero (_Greatness and Decline of Rome_, Eng. trans. ii,
     App. A) has independently (but in agreement with Weber and
     Salvioli) carried M'Culloch's thesis further, and has opposed the
     view that the "competition" of Sicilian and African wheat "was the
     cause of the agricultural depression from which Italy began to
     suffer in 150 B.C." His own theory is the singular one that the
     "depression" was caused by "the increased cost of living" arising
     out of luxurious habits! This untenable and indeed unintelligible
     conclusion he ostensibly reaches by a series of arguments that are
     alternately incoherent and rotatory, of propositions some of which
     are rebutted by himself, and of assumptions that are plainly
     astray. The dispute may be condensed thus:--

     (1) "In antiquity," the Professor begins, "each district consumed
     its own wheat"; yet he goes on to mention that in the fifth and
     fourth centuries B.C. Attica was "obliged to import, even in good
     seasons, between 12,000,000 and 15,000,000 bushels." This
     contradiction he appears to think is saved by the addendum that
     "the amount in question is a very small one, compared with the
     figures of modern commerce." Naturally it is, Athens being a small
     State compared with those of to-day. But the contradiction stands
     unresolved. And it follows that larger towns, not placed in
     fruitful "districts," would have proportionally larger imports.

     (2) "Moreover," writes the Professor, "while the industrial
     countries of to-day seek so far as possible to check the import of
     cereals by protective duties, Athens used every expedient of war
     and diplomacy to render the supply of imported corn both regular
     and abundant." It is startling to find a professor of history, a
     sociological historian, unaware that Britain, Belgium, and Holland
     have no import duties on corn. (The most exclusive State in that
     matter is Portugal, which, with no pretensions to be an industrial
     State, prohibits corn imports altogether.)

     (3) More plausibly, Prof. Ferrero argues that the policy of Athens
     proves that "corn was not easily transported for sale beyond the
     local market." But the efforts of the Athenians "to obtain the
     mastery of the Black Sea, and especially of the Bosphorus, _in
     order to capture the corn trade for themselves_, or to entrust it,
     on their own conditions, to whom they pleased," proves that the
     difficulties of transport were mainly those set up by hostile
     States or pirates, and that--as the Professor admits--the fertile
     Crimea, with its sparse population, yielded an easy surplus for
     export.

     (4) All this, however, is only partially relevant to the question
     of the supplies of Rome from Sicily, Sardinia, Africa, and Spain in
     the second century B.C. Did such supplies come, or did they not? As
     the Professor admits, they were "vital" to the Roman military
     policy; and "she had immense granaries at her disposal whenever she
     required them." But such sources of supply meant a certain large
     normal production; and this would enter Italy in time of peace. If
     it was purposely maintained in view of the needs of war-time, so
     much the more surely would it undersell Italian wheat, raised on a
     less fruitful soil. In no other way could Sicily and Africa yield
     either annual tribute to Rome or rents to Roman owners of land in
     those countries. The first effect of the importation would be to
     add the pressure of lowered prices to the discouragement already
     offered to private cultivators by the inducements of loot in war,
     fleecings in administration of newly conquered countries, commerce,
     and usury. Of this discouragement the sequel would be the attempt
     to run by slave labour the large estates in which the old farms
     were merged. But slave labour is apt to be bad labour, and
     agriculture could not thereby be restored.

     (5) The thesis that agriculture was _depressed_ by high cost of
     living (= high prices for agricultural products) it is not easy to
     treat with seriousness. The simple fact is that sea-carriage to
     Rome from Sicily, Spain, and Africa must have been cheaper than
     land carriage from most parts of Italy to the capital. As Prof.
     Ferrero notes, food prices in the valley of the Po were very
     low--obviously because cost of carriage either to Rome or to the
     southern seaports deterred export.

     (6) Prof. Ferrero's fallacy is capped by his proposition that "the
     economic crisis from which Italy has been suffering during the last
     twenty years is due to the increased cost of living occasioned by
     the introduction, from 1848 onwards, of the industrial civilisation
     of England and France into an old agricultural society." The
     confusion here defies analysis. Suffice it to say that the high
     cost of living in modern Italy is due to tariffs and high taxation.
     Sugar is dear there not because Italians consume it
     luxuriously--they do not and cannot--but because a particularly
     unintelligent policy of Protection causes them to pay for beetroot
     sugar produced in a country ill-suited to the growth of beetroot.
     Living costs more in Germany, France, and the United States than in
     Britain, not because those countries have only recently become
     "luxurious," but because they heavily tax imports. Costs of living
     in Rome certainly rose as Romans raised their standards of
     consumption; but their importation of corn from conquered provinces
     kept food prices lower than they would have been otherwise; and
     Italian agriculture was largely abandoned in favour of easier ways
     of making money.

     Prof. Ferrero supplies a partial confutation of his economic theory
     by his own account (i, 311) of how, in the time of Pompey, "once
     more the precious metals were _cheap and abundant_" after a time of
     scarcity, and the decadent slave system of agriculture was
     superseded by new forms of production. (See above, p. 79, _note_.)
     But abundant bullion means high prices for produce, which the
     Professor has declared to be a cause of depression! As to the new
     production, the process certainly cannot have taken place with the
     rapidity which his description suggests. "The hideous
     slave-shelters or compounds [_ergastula_], with their gangs of
     forced labourers, vanished from the scene, together with the huge
     desolate tracts of pasture where they had spent their days [?], to
     be replaced by vineyards, olive-groves, and orchards, now planted
     in all parts of the peninsula, ... estates on which the new slave
     immigrants contentedly cultivated the vine or the olive, or bred
     animals for the stable or transport, under the direction of a Greek
     or Oriental bailiff; ... pleasant cottages of landlords, who farmed
     their own holdings with the help of a few slaves." All this cannot
     have happened in the time of Pompey. But in any case, inasmuch as
     bullion was rife, prices in general must have been high, yet
     without "depression"; and the new demand for wine and olives, in
     the terms of the case, made their cultivation remunerative. But
     "huge pastures" cannot have been "replaced" by vineyards and
     olive-groves; and Italian agriculture did not in imperial times
     become again the thing it had been.

It was not that, as Pliny put it in the perpetually quoted phrase,[196]
the _latifundia_, the great estates, had ruined Italy and began to ruin
the provinces; it was that, first, the fertile conquered provinces,
notably Sicily, undersold Italy; whereafter the economically advantaged
competition of Egypt, as imperially exploited, and of the African
provinces, undersold the produce of most of the other regions, and would
have done so equally had their agriculture remained in the hands of
small farmers. The _latifundia_ were themselves effects of the policy of
conquest and annexation. The theory that "those large pastoral estates,
and that slave-cultivation, which had so powerful and so deleterious an
influence over Italian husbandry and population, may be principally
ascribed to the confiscations and the military colonies of Sulla and his
successors," is clearly wide of the mark.

     So M'Culloch, _Treatises and Essays: Colonial System of the
     Ancients_, p. 426. No doubt agriculture went rapidly from bad to
     worse in the convulsions of Sulla's rule, when whole territories
     passed into the hands of his partisans. These would be bent on the
     use of slave labour, and would take to the forms of production
     which gave them the best money return. On the other hand, in an age
     of chronic confiscation of whole areas, steady men were not likely
     to be attracted to the land. See Prof. Pelham's _Outlines_, p. 213;
     Dureau de la Malle, _ƒcon. polit. des Romains_, vol. ii, liv. iii,
     ch. 22.

Large capitalistic estates were beginning to arise in Attica in the time
of Solon, and were normal in the time of Xenophon.[197] In Carthage,
where they likewise arose in due economic course, they do not seem to
have hurt agriculture, though worked by slave labour;[198] and, on the
other hand, the Roman military colonies were an attempt, albeit vain, to
restore a free farming population. In Italy the disease was older than
Sulla. When Tiberius Gracchus was passing through Etruria on his way
from Spain, fifty years before the rule of Sulla, he saw no free
labourers, but only slaves in chains.[199] The true account of the
matter is this: that if Italy had not conquered Sicily, North Africa,
Egypt, and the other fertile provinces, their competition could not have
come to pass as it did; for any imports in that case would have had to
be paid for by exports, and Italy had nothing adequate to export. It was
the power to exact tribute, or otherwise the appropriation of conquered
territory as estates by the nobles,[200] that upset the economic
balance. Not merely in order to support the policy of cheap or free
food--which was extended to other large Italian cities--but because corn
was the staple product of Sicily and Egypt and North Africa, the tribute
came in large measure in the form of foods; and in so far as it came in
bullion, the coin had to be speedily re-exported to pay for further food
and for the manufactures turned out by the provinces, and bought by the
Italian rich. Save in so far as rich amateurs of agriculture went on
farming at small profit or at a loss,[201] Italy produced little beyond
olives and wine and cattle,[202] and ordinary wares for home
consumption. Industrially considered, the society of the whole peninsula
was thus finally a mere shell, doing its exchanges mainly in virtue of
the annual income it extorted from provincial labour, and growing more
and more worthless in point of character as its vital basis grew more
and more strictly factitious. It would be accurate to say of the Empire,
as represented by part of Italy and the capital, that it was a vast
economic simulacrum. The paternal policy of the emperors,[203] good and
bad, wrought to pretty much the same kind of result as the egoism of the
upper classes had done; and though their popular measures must have
exasperated the Senate, that body had in general to tolerate their
well-meaning deeds as it did their crimes.[204]

We may perhaps better understand the case by supposing a certain
economic development to take place in England in the distant future. At
present we remain, as we are likely long to remain, economically
advantaged or beneficed for manufacture by our coalfields, which are
unequalled in Europe, though Germany, through the invention which made
her phosphoric iron workable, has a larger store of the chief industrial
metal. In return for our coal and manufactures and our shipping
services, we import foods and goods that otherwise we could not pay for;
and the additional revenue from British investments in foreign debts and
enterprises further swells the food and raw material import, thus
depressing to a considerable extent _our_ agriculture under a system of
large farms. When in the course of centuries the coalfields are
exhausted, unless it should be found that the winds and tides can be
made to yield electric power cheaply enough, our manufacturing
population will probably dwindle. Either the United States will
supersede us with their stores of coal, or--if, as may well be, their
stores are already exhausted by a vaster exploitation--China may take
the lead. The chief advantage left us would be the skill and efficiency
of our industrial population--an important but incalculable factor.[205]
A "return to the land," if not achieved beforehand, might in that case
be assumed to be inevitable; but should Australian, Indian, and North
and South American wheat-production continue (as it may or may not) to
have the same relative advantages of soil, our remaining city
populations would continue to buy foreign corn; and the land might still
be largely turned to pasture. That remaining city population, roughly
speaking, would in the terms of the case consist of (_a_) those persons
drawing incomes from foreign investments; (_b_) those workmen,
tradesmen, and professional people who could still be successfully
employed in manufactures, or whom the interest-drawing classes employed
to do their necessary home-work, as the Romans perforce employed to the
last many workmen and doctors and scribes, slave or free; (_c_) those
who might earn incomes by seafaring; and (_d_) the official
class--necessarily reduced, like every other. Until the incomes from
foreign investments had in some measure disappeared, the country could
not gravitate down to an economically stable recommencement in
agriculture.

We need not consider curiously whether things would or will happen in
exactly this way: the actual presumption is that before coal is
exhausted the whole social structure will be modified; and it is
conceivable that the idle class may have been eliminated. But we are
supposing a less progressive evolution for illustration's sake. Suffice
it that such a development would be in a measure economically analogous
to what took place in ancient Rome. If the upper-class population of
such a hypothetical future in England, instead of receiving only
dividends from foreign stocks and pensions from the revenue of India,
were able to extort an absolute tribute from India and other dominions,
the parallel would be so much the closer. What held together the Roman
Empire so long was, on the one hand, the developed military and
juridical organisation with its maintaining revenue, and on the other
hand the absence of any competent antagonist. Could a Mithridates or an
Alexander have arisen during the reign of one of the worse emperors, he
might more easily have overrun the Roman world than Rome did Carthage.
As it was, all the civilised parts of the Empire shared its political
an¾mia; and indeed the comparative comfort of the Roman peace, with all
its burden of taxation, was in many of the provinces a sufficient though
precarious ground for not returning to the old life of chronic warfare,
at least for men who had lost the spirit of reasoned political
self-assertion.

Under good emperors, the system worked imposingly enough; and Mommsen,
echoing Gibbon, not unwarrantably bids us ask ourselves whether the
south of Europe has ever since been better governed than it was under
the Antonines.[206] The purely piratical plunder carried on by governors
under the Republic was now, no doubt, in large measure restricted. But,
to say nothing of the state of character and intellect, the economic
evisceration was proceeding steadily alike under good emperors and bad,
and the Stoic jurists did but frame good laws for a worm-eaten society.
So long as the seat of empire remained at Rome, drawing the tribute
thither, the imperial system would give an air of solidity to Italian
life; but when the Roman population itself grew cosmopolitanised in all
its classes, taking in all the races of the Empire, the provinces were
in the terms of the case as Roman as the capital; and there was no
special reason, save the principle of concentration, why the later
emperors should reside there. Where of old the provincial governors had
extorted from their subjects fortunes for themselves, to be spent in
Rome like the public tribute, they would now tend to act as permanent
dwellers in their districts.[207] Once the palace was set up elsewhere,
the accessories of administration inevitably followed; and the
transference of official and other population would partly balance the
restriction of food supply caused by the deflection of Egyptian
corn-tribute to Constantinople--a loss that had to be made good by a
drain on Libya and Carthage.[208] But when under Valentinian and Valens
the Empire came to be definitely divided, the western section, whose
main source of revenue was the African province, speedily fell into
financial straits. Valentinian had on his hands in the ten years of his
reign three costly wars--one to recover Britain, one to repel the
Alemanni from Gaul, one to recover Africa from Firmus; and it was
apparently the drain on revenue thus set up, aggravated by an African
famine,[209] that drove Gratian on his accession to the step of
confiscating the revenues of the pagan cults.[210] So great was the
State's need that even the pagan Eugenius could not restore the pagan
revenues. Thenceforth the financial decay headed the military; and we
shall perhaps not be wrong in saying that the growth of medieval Italy,
the new and better-rooted life which was to make possible the
Renaissance, obscurely began when Italy, stripped of Gaul and Spain and
Africa, and cut off from the East, which held Egypt, was deprived of its
unearned income, and the populace had in part to turn for fresh life to
agriculture and industry. The flight of the propertied families at each
successive sack of Rome by Goth and Vandal must have left freedom to
many, and room for new enterprise to the more capable, though in some
districts there seems to have been absolute depopulation. And while
Italy thus fell upon a wholesomer poverty,[211] the provinces would be
less impoverished.

Some of the ruin, indeed, has not been remedied to this day. Part of the
curse of conquest was the extension of the malarious area of Italian
soil, always considerable. The three temples to the Goddess Fever in
Rome were the recognition of a standing scourge, made active by every
overflow of the Tiber; and pestilent areas were common throughout the
land. But when the great plain of Latium was well peopled, the feverous
area was in constant process of reduction by agriculture and drainage;
and the inhabitants had become in large part immune to infection.[212]
In the early, the "Social" and the later civil wars it was devastated
and depopulated to such an extent that Pliny[213] could enumerate
fifty-three utterly eliminated stocks or "peoples," and could cite the
record of thirty-three towns which had stood where now were the Pontine
marshes.[214] As early as 340 B.C. the land round Rome was counted
unhealthy, so that veterans were loth to settle on it;[215] but
population went back instead of forward. It is thus true that the
malaria of the Campagna and other districts was an ancient trouble;[216]
but it was the perpetual march of conquest, for ever sending forth to
more attractive soils the stocks who might have re-peopled and recovered
it, that made that and so much more of Italy fixedly pestilential down
to modern times. Thus the paralysis of Italian production by conquest
was a twofold process, direct and indirect.

In ancient as in later times, doubtless, attempts were made to bring
back to human habitation the stricken deserts that stained Italy like a
leprosy. Thus C¾sar sought early to repeople Campania from the idle
populace of Rome.[217] But to maintain steady cultivation in unhealthy
regions there was needed an immune stock, and that was reproducible only
by the old way of savage, self-preserving persistence on the part of
hardy and primitive rustics working their own land. The new imported
stocks, slave or free, wilted away before the scourge of fever; and the
"principle of population," weakened in the spring, failed to surmount
the resistance of Nature. Under the early Empire the labour needed for
the culture of the Campagna had to be brought in annually from distant
districts; and when the invading Goths in the fifth century devastated
the whole area there was no energy left to recover it.

     [The theories once current as to ancient knowledge of prophylactics
     in the shape of perfumes and the habitual use of woollen clothing
     may be dismissed as fanciful. The rational conclusion is that the
     early races developed a relative immunity, which was possessed
     neither by the eastern stocks imported in the period of conquest
     nor by the later invading Teutons. It is noteworthy, however, that
     at all times the dwellers in the tainted areas learned something of
     the necessary hygiene. See Dureau de la Malle, as cited. His
     investigation is interesting as showing how, in the early decades
     of the nineteenth century, long before Pasteur, biology had reached
     the perception that fevers come of an organic infection. It was
     doubtless such knowledge that led the Romans to burn their dead.]

There remains the question, What is the precise economic statement of
the final collapse? It is easy to figure that in terms of _(a)_
increasing barbarian enterprise, stimulated by the personal experience
of the many barbarians who served the Empire, and of _(b)_ increasing
moral weakness on the part of the whole administrative system. And
doubtless this change in the balance of military energy was decisive.
When utter weaklings sat by heredity in the imperial chair, at best
contemptuously tolerated by their alien officers, the end was
necessarily near. The most incurable disease of empire was just empire;
ages of parasitism had made the Roman ruling class incapable of
energetic action; and the autocracy had long withheld from citizens the
use of arms. But the long subsistence of the Eastern Empire as
contrasted with the Western proves that not only had the barbarians an
easier task against Italy in terms of its easiness of invasion, but the
defence was there relatively weaker in terms of lack of resources. This
lack has been wholly or partly explained by quite a number of
writers[218] as a result of a failure in the whole supply of the
precious metals--a proposition which may be understood of either a
falling-off in the yield of the mines or a general withdrawal of bullion
from the Empire. It is difficult to see how either explanation can
stand. There was already an immense amount of bullion in the Empire, and
a general withdrawal could take place only by way of export to the
barbarian east in return for commodities.[219] But the eastern provinces
of the Empire were still in themselves abundantly productive, and after
the fall of Rome they continued to exhibit industrial solvency. No doubt
the plunder of Rome by Alaric (409-10) greatly crippled the west, and
the loss of Gaul and Spain was worse; but while the Empire retained
Africa it had a source of real revenue. The beginning of the end, or
rather the virtual end, came with the conquest of the African province
by the Vandals (430-40). In 455 came the sack of Rome by the Vandals,
whereafter there remains only a shadow of the Roman Empire, till
Odoaker, dismissing Augustulus, makes himself king of Italy.

As for the falling-off in the yield of the Spanish mines, to which some
writers seem to attribute the whole collapse, it could only mean that
the Roman Government at length realised what had been as true before
and has been as true since, that _all_ gold-mining, save in the case of
the richest and easiest mines, separately considered, or of groups of
mines which have been acquired at less cost than went to find and open
them, is carried on at a loss as against the standing competition of the
great mass of precious metal above-ground at any moment, the output of
unknown barbarian toil and infinite slave labour, begun long before the
age of written history.[220] When it was reluctantly realised that the
cost of working either the gold or the silver mines was greater to the
State than their product,[221] they would be abandoned; though under a
free government private speculators would have been found ready to risk
more money in reopening them immediately. As a matter of fact, the
Spanish mines were actually worked by the Saracens in the Middle Ages,
and have been since. The Romans had made the natural blunder of greed in
taking all gold and silver mines into the hands of the State,[222] where
speculative private enterprise would have gone on working them at a
loss, and so adding--vainly enough--to the total bullion in circulation,
on which the State could levy its taxes. Even as it was, when they were
losing nothing, but rather checking loss, by abandoning the mines, a
falling-off in revenue from one source could have been made good by
taxation if the fiscal system had remained unimpaired, and if the former
income of Italy had not been affected by other causes than a stoppage of
mining output.

If the mere cessation of public gold-mining were the cause of a general
weakening of the imperial power, and by consequence the cause of the
collapse in Italy, it ought equally to have affected the Eastern Empire,
which we know to have possessed a normal sufficiency of bullion all
through the Dark and Middle Ages, though it had no mines left.[223] The
fact is that, when Valentinian and Valens divided the Empire between
them, the former chose the western half because he shared the delusion
that the Spanish mines were a greater source of real wealth than the
fruitful provinces of the east. Those could always procure the bullion
they required, because they had produce to exchange for it. Gold mines
even of average fertility could have availed no more; and if Italy had
remained agriculturally productive she could have sustained herself
without any mines.

     Dr. Cunningham, in his study of the economic conditions of the
     declining Empire, appears to lay undue stress on the factor of
     scarcity of bullion, and does not duly recognise the difference of
     progression between the case of Italy and that of the east. "The
     Roman Empire," he writes (p. 187, _note_), lacked both treasure and
     capital, "and _it perished_." When? The eastern seat of the Empire
     survived the western by a thousand years. "It seems highly
     improbable," he argues again (p. 185), "that the drain of silver to
     the east, which continued during the Middle Ages, was suspended at
     any period of the history of the Empire." But such a drain (which
     means a depletion) cannot go on for twelve hundred years; and it
     was certainly not a drain of silver to the east that ruined the
     Byzantine Empire. Finlay's dictum (i, 52) that the debasement of
     the currency between Caracalla and Gallienus "annihilated a great
     part of the trading capital in the Roman Empire and rendered it
     impossible to carry on commercial transactions, not only with
     foreign countries but even with distant provinces," is another
     erroneous theorem.

It seems clear that the Italian collapse occurred as it did because,
after the fall of the three great possessions, Gaul, Spain, and Africa,
there was left only the central State, made impotent by long parasitism
to meet the growing barbarian pressure. Italy in the transition period
can have yielded very little revenue, though Rome had for the barbarians
plenty of hoarded plunder; and the country had long ceased to yield good
troops. Gaul itself had been monstrously taxed; and it must have been no
less a prudent than a benevolent motive that led Julian to reduce to
£2,000,000 the revenue of £7,000,000 extorted by Constantine and
Constantius.[224] The greater the depression in the sources of income,
and the greater the costs of the frontier wars, the harder became the
pressure of the fiscal system, till the burdens laid on the upper
citizens who formed the curia[225] put them out of all heart for
patriotic action, and drove many to flight, to slavery, or the cloister.
Towards the end, indeed, there was set up a rapid process of economic
change which substituted for slaves a class of serfs, _coloni_,
_adscriptitii_, and so on, who though tied to the land paid a rent for
it and could keep any surplus; but under this system agriculture was
thus far no more a source of revenue than before. Latterly the very wine
of Italy grew worthless, and its olives decayed;[226] so that in once
fruitful Campania, "the orchard of the south," Honorius in the year 395
had to strike from the fiscal registers, as worthless, more than three
hundred thousand acres of land[227]--an eighth of the whole province.
After the ruinous invasions of Rhadagast and Alaric, fresh remissions of
taxation had to be given, so that as the danger neared the defence
weakened.[228] In the east, again, there was no impulse to succour the
falling west; and indeed there was not the ability. The fiscal power of
the Emperor was inelastic; his revenues, extorted by cruel pressure,
needed careful husbanding; his own world needed all his attention; and
the eastern upper class of clerics and officials were not the people to
strain themselves for the mere military retention of Britain or Gaul or
Italy, as Rome would have done in the republican period, or as the
emperors would have done before the period of decentralisation. For the
rich agricultural provinces of Africa they did strive with success when
Belisarius overthrew the Vandals; and in that age, when Italy had once
more become revenue-yielding through the revival of her agriculture, it
was worth the while of the east to reconquer Italy also; but the old
spirit of resolute dominion and aggression was gone. Armies could still
be enrolled and generalled if there was pay for them; but the pay
failed, not because bullion was lacking, but because the will and power
to supply and apply it in the old fashion was lacking. The new age,
after Theodosius, looked at these matters in a different light--the
light of commercial self-interest and Christian or eastern disregard for
Roman tradition and prestige. The new religion, Christianity, was a
direct solvent of imperial patriotism in the old sense, transferring as
it did the concern of serious men from this world to the next, and from
political theory to theological. In Italy, besides, the priesthood could
count on making rather more docile Christians of the invaders than it
had done of the previous inhabitants; so that Christian Rome, once
overrun, must needs remain so.

     [Finlay (ed. cited i, 294) suggests that "probably the knowledge
     which the Emperor Justin and his cabinet must have possessed of the
     impossibility of deriving any revenue from the agricultural
     districts of Italy offers the simplest explanation of the
     indifference manifested at Constantinople to the Lombard invasion."
     But he had already noted (p. 236, _note_) that a great revival of
     agriculture took place in the reign of Theodoric. Then it could
     only be through the exhaustion of the subsequent wars that Italy
     was incapable of yielding a revenue. The true explanation of
     Justin's inaction is probably not indifference but impotence, the
     Empire's resources being then drained.

     After the invasion of the Lombards the clergy and Senate of Rome
     had to send a large sum in bullion to induce the Emperor Maurice to
     listen to their prayers for help. Still the help could not be
     given, though, save in the case of the coast towns (see below, p.
     188), tribute was paid to Byzantium till the final breach between
     Rome and Leo the Iconoclast. (Gibbon, Bohn ed. v, 114.)

     Guizot (_Histoire de la Civilisation en France_, 13e Žd. i, 75, 76)
     notes the fundamental difference in the attitude of the Church
     under the old and eastern emperors and under the Teutonic rule.
     Symonds (_Renaissance in Italy_, 2nd ed. i, 43) thinks this was a
     result of Theodoric's not having made Rome his headquarters, and
     his having treated it with special respect. But the clergy of Gaul
     at once gained an ascendency over the Frankish kings, and the popes
     would probably have done as well with resident emperors as with
     absentees. Their great resource was that of playing one Christian
     monarch against another--a plan not open to the patriarch of
     Constantinople.]

That the Empire could still at a push raise armies and find for them
generals who could beat back the barbarians was sufficiently shown in
the careers of Stilicho and Aetius and Belisarius; but the extreme
parsimony with which Justinian supported his great commander in Italy is
some proof of the economic difficulty of keeping up, even in a period of
prudent administration,[229] a paid force along the vast frontiers of
what had been Hadrian's realm. Only as ruled by one central system,
inspired by an ideal of European empire, and using the finance and force
of the whole for the defence of any part, could that realm have been
preserved; and when Diocletian, while holding mechanically by the ideal
of empire, began the disintegration of its executive, he began the
ending of the ideal. The creation of an eastern capital was now
inevitable; and when once the halving of the Empire had become a matter
of course, the west, hollow at the core, was fated to fall. We should
thus not be finally wrong in saying that "the Roman idea" died out
before the Western Empire could fall; provided only that we recognise
the economic and other sociological causation of the process.

It remains to note, finally, that the process cannot possibly be
explained by the theory that the Eastern Empire was successfully unified
by Christianity, and that the Western remained divided by reason of the
obstinate adherence of the Roman aristocracy to Paganism. The framer of
this theory confutes it by affirming that in Greece "the popular element
... by its alliance with Christianity, infused into society the energy
which saved the Eastern Empire," while admitting that in Italy also the
"great body of the [city] population" had embraced Christianity. Surely
the popular Christian element ought to have saved Italy also if it were
the saving force. Italy was essentially Christian in the age of
Belisarius: if there was any special element of disunion it was the
mutual hatred of Arians and Athanasians and other sects, which had
abundantly existed also in the east, where it finally furthered the
Saracen conquest of the Asiatic provinces and Egypt,[230] but as
regarded the central part of the Empire was periodically got rid of by
the suppression of all heresy.[231] Eastern unification, such as it was,
had thus been the work, not of "Christianity," or of any sudden spirit
of unity among the Greeks, but of the Imperial Government, which in the
East had sufficient command of, and needed for its own sake to use, the
resources that we have seen lost to Italy.[232] As for the established
religion, it was the insoluble conflict of doctrine as to images that
finally, in the reign of Leo the Iconoclast, arrayed the Papacy against
the Christian Emperor, and completed the sunderance of Greek and Latin
Christendom; while in the East the patriarch of Jerusalem became the
minister of the Moslem conquerors in the seventh century, as did the
patriarch of Constantinople in the fifteenth.
