Chapter III

FROM THE RESTORATION TO ANNE


¤ 1

The broad outcome of the monarchic restoration under Charles II is the
intensifying of the royalist sentiment by way of reaction from the
Rebellion and the autocracy of the Protector. It has been held that had
Richard Cromwell had the energy of his father he might easily have
maintained his position, so quietly was his accession at first accepted;
and no doubt his irresolution made much of the difference between
success and failure; but nothing can be clearer than the leaning of the
mass of the people to the "lawful" dynasty. It is a proof of Cromwell's
complete dislocation of the old state of touch between the official
classes and the public,[1145] that the army leaders had no misgivings
when they commenced to intrigue against Richard, and that Monk was so
slow to declare for the king when the event showed how immense was the
royalist preponderance. During the Rebellion, London, led by the
Puritans, had dominated the country; under the Protectorate, town and
country were alike dominated by a selected official and military class,
representing a minority with military force to impose its rule. As soon
as this class began to disrupt in factions, the released play of common
sentiment began to carry all forward on a broad tide towards a
Restoration; the only footing on which the English people could yet
unite being one of tradition and superstition. The anarchy of a State
still unfitted for republican government had before brought about the
Protectorate: it now led back to the monarchy. And that the new monarchy
did not become as absolute as the contemporary rule of Louis XIV was
solely owing to the accident of the later adhesion of the restored
dynasty to the Church of Rome, which the mass of the people feared more
than they did even the prospect of another Civil War. It was the memory
of the Fronde that enabled Louis to override the remains of the French
constitution and set up an autocracy; and the same force was now at
work in England. It was the memory of the Civil War that made the
people so much more forbearing with the new king, when his private
adhesion to the Catholic Church became generally suspected,[1146] than
their fathers had been with his father. By temperament and from
experience they were disposed to do anything for the throne; but the
general fear of Popery on the one hand, and the special royalist
aversion to the Puritan sects on the other, plunged the State into a new
ferment of ecclesiastical politics, the strifes of which so far absorbed
the general energy that ill-luck in the commercial wars with Holland
seems to have been almost a necessary result, even had the king ruled
well. Not that the generation of Charles II was a whit less bent on
dominion and acquisition than the decade of the Protectorate.

In this new situation, under a king too little devoted to his trade to
choose really sagacious courses, but too shrewd to ruin himself, occur
the beginnings of parliamentary statesmanship, in the modern sense of
government in harmony with the Crown. The powerful administration of
Strafford had been a matter of helping the Crown to resist Parliament.
The very capable though unforeseeing statesmanship of the Pyms and
Hampdens of the Long Parliament, again, was a matter of resisting the
Crown; and with Shaftesbury such resistance recurred; but the indolence
of the king, joined with his sense of the dangers of the old
favouritism, gave rise to the principle of Ministerial Government before
partisan Cabinets had come into existence. Clarendon had in him much of
the constitutionalist temper. Shaftesbury, however, was better qualified
both by training and parts for the task of statesmanship in a stormy and
unscrupulous generation. Read dispassionately, his story is seen to be
in the main what his careful vindicator would make it--that of a man of
average moral quality, with exceptional energy and resource. The legend
of his wickedness[1147] is somewhat puzzling, in view of his staunch
hostility to Romanism, and of his political superiority to the famous
Deist statesman of the next generation, Bolingbroke, who has been so
little blackened in comparison. A reasonable explanation is that
Shaftesbury was damned by the Church for resisting the king, while
Bolingbroke's services to the Church covered his multitude of sins. But
the idle rumours of Shaftesbury's debauchery[1148] apparently damaged
him with the Protestant Dissenters, and his wickedly reckless policy
over the Popish Plot might easily secure him a share in the infamy which
is the sole association of the name of Titus Oates. Here also, however,
he has been calumniated. Burnet, though plainly disliking him, says
nothing of debauchery in his life, and declined to believe, when Charles
suggested it, that he had any part in trumping up the falsehoods about
the Plot.[1149]

There can be no reasonable doubt that Shaftesbury honestly believed
there was a great danger of the re-establishment of Popery, and it is
not at all improbable that he credited some of the tales told, as Lord
Russell solemnly testified at the scaffold that he for his part had
done. To acquit Russell and criminate Shaftesbury is possible only to
those who have made up their minds before trying the case. It is
practically certain, moreover, that some vague Catholic plotting really
did take place;[1150] and in the then posture of affairs nothing was
more likely. Shaftesbury, like the other capable statesmen of the
Restoration, was in favour of toleration of the Dissenters; but like all
other Protestant statesmen of the age, he thought it impossible to
tolerate Catholicism. Nor can it well be doubted that had Charles or
James been able to establish the Roman system, it would have gone hard
with Protestantism. It is true that the only exhibition thus far of the
spirit of tolerance in Protestant and Catholic affairs in France and
England had been on the part of Richelieu towards the Huguenots,
themselves intensely intolerant; but it could not reasonably be supposed
that an English Catholic king or statesman, once well fixed in power,
would have the wisdom or forbearance of Richelieu. The two systems, in
fine, aimed at each other's annihilation; and Shaftesbury simply acted,
politically that is, as the men of the First Rebellion would have done
in similar circumstances. Instead of dismissing him as a mere
scoundrel, we are led to realise how imperfectly moralised were all the
men of his age in matters of religion and racial enmity. The friend of
Locke can hardly have been a rascal.

For the rest, he was admitted even by the malicious and declamatory
Dryden to have been a just Chancellor; it is proved that he opposed the
Stop of the Exchequer; and he sharply resisted the rapacity of the royal
concubines. In his earlier policy towards Holland he conformed odiously
enough to the ordinary moral standard of the time[1151] in politics, a
standard little improved upon in the time of Palmerston, and not
discarded by those Englishmen who continue to talk of Russia as
England's natural enemy, or by those who speak of Germany as a trade
rival that must be fought to a finish. His changes of side between the
outbreak of the Rebellion and his death, while showing the moral and
intellectual instability of the period, were not dishonourable, and are
not for a moment to be compared with those of Dryden, most unstable of
all men of genius, whose unscrupulous but admirably artistic portrait of
the statesman has doubtless gone far to keep Shaftesbury's name in
disesteem. It may be, again, that his sufficient wealth takes away
somewhat from the merit of his steadfast refusal of French bribes; but
the fact should be kept in mind,[1152] as against the other fact that
not only the king and some of the Opposition but Algernon Sidney took
them.[1153] On the whole, Shaftesbury was the most tolerable of the
Ministers of his day, though his animus against Catholicism made him
grossly unscrupulous toward individual Catholics; and his miscalculation
of possibilities, in clinging to the scheme of giving Monmouth the
succession, finally wrecked his career. He had almost no alternative,
placed and principled as he was, save to call in the Prince of Orange;
and this would really have been at that moment no more feasible a course
than it was to declare Monmouth the heir, besides being more hazardous,
in that William was visibly less easy to lead. Of Shaftesbury, Burnet
admits that "his strength lay in the knowledge of England"; and when he
took a fatal course, it was because the whole situation was desperate.
His fall measures not so much the capacity of Charles as the force which
the royalist superstition had gathered.


¤ 2

This growth can be traced in the clerical literature of the time. The
conception of a "divine right" inhering in kings by heredity--a
conception arising naturally as part of the general ethic of feudal
inheritance--had been emphasised on the Protestant side in England[1154]
by way of express resistance to the Papacy, which from the time of
Gregory VII had been wont in its strifes with emperors and kings to deny
their divine right and to assert its own, formally founding the latter,
however, on the "natural" right inherent in masses of men to choose
their own rulers, even as the citizens of Rome had been wont to elect
the Popes.[1155] The total effect of the English Rebellion was to give
an immense stimulus to the high monarchic view, not now as against the
Papacy, but as against Parliament. When the learned Usher drew up at the
request of Charles I his treatise[1156] on _The Power communicated by
God to the Prince, and the Obedience required of the Subject_, he
proceeded almost wholly on arguments from the Scriptures and the
Fathers; not that there were not already many deliverances from modern
authorities on the point, but that these evidently had not entered into
the ordinary stock of opinion. On the papal side, from Thomas
Aquinas[1157] onwards, the negative view had been carefully set forth,
not merely as a papal claim, but also as an obvious affirmation of the
ancient "law of nature." Thus the Spanish Jesuit Suarez (1548-1617) had
in his _Tractatus de Legibus_, while deriving all law from the will of
God, expressly rejected the doctrine that the power of rule inheres by
succession in single princes. Such power, he declared, "by its very
nature, belongs to no one man, but to a multitude of men,"[1158] adding
a refutation of the patriarchal theory which "might have caused our
English divines to blush before the Jesuit of Granada."[1159] At the
beginning of the seventeenth century, again, while leading Englishmen
were affirming divine right, the German Protestant Althusius, Professor
of Law at Herborn, publishing his _Politica methodice digesta_ (1603),
declares in a dedication to the States of Friesland that the supreme
power lies in the people.[1160] Hooker, too, had stamped the principle
of "consent" with his authority, very much as did Suarez.[1161]

But the compiler of _The History of Passive Obedience since the
Reformation_,[1162] after showing that the tenet[1163] had been held by
dozens of Protestant divines and jurists after the Reformation, and even
strongly affirmed by Nonconformists, is able to cite nearly as many
assertions of it in the reign of Charles II as in the whole preceding
period. The clergy were, indeed, able to show that the principle of
non-resistance had been a common doctrine up to the Great Rebellion;
and, though the contrary view was on the whole more common,[1164] it
well illustrates the instinctive character of political movement that
the democratic doctrine had followed the course of action step by step,
and not preceded it. There had been resistance before the right to
resist was formulated in the schools. And Bishop Guthry records that at
the General Assembly in Edinburgh in January, 1645, "everyone had in his
hand that book lately published by Mr. Samuel Rutherford, entitled _Lex
Rex_, which was stuffed with positions that in the time of peace and
order would have been judged damnable treasons; yet were now so idolised
that, whereas in the beginning of the work Buchanan's treatise, _De Jure
Regni apud Scotos_, was looked upon as an oracle, this coming forth, it
was slighted as not anti-monarchical enough, and Rutherford's _Lex Rex_
only thought authentic."[1165] So Milton's answer to Salmasius,
vindicating the right of rebellion as inherent in freemen, marks the
high tide of feeling that sustained the foremost regicides. But in the
nature of the case the feeling swung as far the other way when they had
touched their extreme limit of action; and when the royalist cause came
in the ascendant, the monarchical principle was perhaps more
passionately cherished in England than in any of the other European
States.[1166] How it normally worked may be seen in Dryden's sycophantic
dedication[1167] of his _All for Love_ to Lord Danby (1678), sinking as
it does to the extravagant baseness of the declaration that "every
remonstrance of private men has the seed of treason in it." It was in
this very year that Charles and Danby made the secret treaty with
France, the revelation of which by Louis soon afterwards brought Danby
to the Tower; and Danby it was who three years before carried through
the House of Lords a bill to make all placemen declare on oath that they
considered all resistance to the king unlawful.

The handful of remaining republicans and political Liberals, appealing
as they did to tradition in their treatises against the traditional
pleadings of the Churchmen and royalists, could have no appreciable
influence on the public, because the mere spirit of tradition, when not
appealed to as the sanction of a living movement of resistance, must
needs make for passivity. Algernon Sidney's posthumous folio on
Government in answer to Filmer's _Patriarcha_, arguing the question of
self-government _versus_ divine right, and going over all the ground
from Nimrod downwards, point by point, is a far greater performance than
Filmer's; and Locke in turn brought a still greater power of analysis to
bear on the same refutation; but it is easy to see that Filmer's is the
more readable book, and that with its straightforward dogmatism it would
most readily convince the average Englishman. Nor was the philosophy all
on one side, though Filmer has ten absurdities for the other's one, and
was so unguarded as to commit himself to the doctrine that the
possession of power gives divine right, no matter how come by. Sidney
himself always argued that "Vertue" entitled men to superior power; and
though he might in practice have contended that the choice of the
virtuous should be made by the people, his proposition pointed rather
plainly back to Cromwell, acclaimed by Milton as the worthiest to bear
rule. And to be governed by a military autocrat, however virtuous and
capable, was as little to the taste of that generation as it was to the
taste of Carlyle's. Even a clergyman could see that the political
problem was really one of the practical adjustment of crude conflicting
interests, and that there could easily be as much friction under a
virtuous monarch as under a dissolute one. The conscientiousness of the
first Charles had wrought ruin, where the vicious indolence of the
second steered safely.

As Filmer and Sidney, besides, really agreed in awarding "the tools to
him who could handle them," and as the most pressing practical need was
to avoid civil war, the solution for most people was the more clearly a
"loyal" submission to the reigning house; and no amount of abstract
demonstration of the right of self-government could have hindered the
habit of submission from eating deeper and deeper into the national
character if it were not for the convulsion which changed the dynasty
and set up a deep division of "loyalties," keeping each other in check.
In the strict sense of the term there was no class strife, no democratic
movement, no democratic interest; indeed, no ideal of public interest as
the greatest good of the whole. Thus Harrington's _Oceana_, with its
scheme of "an equal Commonwealth, a Government established upon an equal
Agrarian, arising into the Superstructures of three Orders, the Senat
debating and proposing, the People resolving, and the Magistracy
executing by an equal Rotation through the suffrage of the People given
by the Ballot"[1168]--this conception, later pronounced by Hume "the
only valuable model of a commonwealth that has yet been offered to the
public,"[1169] although the same critic exposed its weakness--was in
fact as wholly beside the case as the principle of the Second Coming. No
man desired the proposed ideal; and the very irrelevance of the
systematic treatises strengthened the case for use and wont. The
political discussions, being thus mostly in the air, could serve only to
prepare leading men to act on certain principles should events forcibly
lead up to new action. But the existing restraints on freedom did not
supply sufficient grievance to breed action. The dissenters themselves
were almost entirely resigned to their ostracism; and the preponderance
of the Church and the Tory party was complete.

Luckily the political fanaticism of Charles I reappeared in his son
James; and that king's determination to re-establish in his realm the
Church of his devotion served to break a spell that nothing else could
have shattered.[1170] The very Church which had been assuring him of his
irresistibility, having to choose between its own continuance and his,
had perforce to desert him; and the old panic fear of Popery, fed by the
spectacle of Jeffreys' Bloody Assize, swept away the monarch who had
aroused it. He would have been an energetic king; his naval Memoirs
exhibit zeal and application to work; and he had so much of rational
humanity in him that in Scotland he pointed out to the popes of
Presbyterianism how irrational as well as merciless was their treatment
of sexual frailty. But his own fanaticism carried him athwart the
superstition which would have sufficed to make him a secure despot in
all other matters; and when the spirit of freedom seemed dying out in
all forms save that of sectarian zealotry, his assault on that brought
about the convulsion which gave it fresh chances of life.


¤ 3

While practical politics was thus becoming more and more of a stupid war
of ecclesiastical prejudices, in which the shiftiest came best off, and
even theoretic politics ran to a vain disputation on the purposes of God
towards Adam, some of the best intelligence of the nation, happily, was
at work on more fruitful lines. The dire results of the principles which
had made for union and strife of late years, drove thoughtful men back
on a ground of union which did not seem to breed a correlative
malignity.[1171] It was in 1660, the year of the Restoration, that the
Royal Society was constituted; but its real beginnings lay in the first
years of peace under Cromwell, when, as Sprat records, a "candid,
unpassionate company" began to meet at Oxford in the lodgings of Dr.
Wilkins, of Wadham College,[1172] to discuss questions of natural fact.
"The University had, at the time, many Members of its own, who had begun
a free way of reasoning; and was also frequented by some gentlemen, of
Philosophical Minds, whom the misfortunes of the Kingdom, and the
security and ease of a retirement amongst Gowns-men, had drawn
thither."[1173] In constituting the Society, the associates "freely
admitted men of different religions, countries, and professions of
life," taking credit to themselves for admitting an intellectual
shopkeeper, though "the far greater number are Gentlemen, free, and
unconfined."[1174] Above all things they shunned sectarian and party
feeling. "Their first purpose was no more then onely the satisfaction of
breathing a freer air, and of conversing in quiet one with another,
without being ingag'd in the passions and madness of that dismal
Age;"[1175] and when they formally incorporated themselves it was
expressly to discuss "things and not words."

     It is noteworthy that the French Academy, which gave the immediate
     suggestion for the constitution of the English Royal Society,
     contained almost no authors save belletrists and ecclesiastics. In
     the list of members down to 1671 (_Relation_ cited, p. 336), I find
     no writer on science save De la Chambre, the King's physician. And
     the first important undertaking of the Academy (projected about
     1637) was a _Dictionary_. Sprat (p. 56) suggests that the Royal
     Society has usefully influenced the Academy in the direction of the
     study of things rather than words. (Compare the avowed literary
     ideal of the authors of the _Relation_, p. 373.) But although the
     French group from the first tended mainly to literary pursuits,
     they too aimed at a "free way of reasoning," "et de ce premier ‰ge
     de l'AcadŽmie, ils en parlent comme d'un ‰ge d'or, durant lequel
     avec toute l'innocence et toute la _libertŽ_ des premiers sicles,
     sans bruit, et sans pompe, et sans autres loix que celles de
     l'amitiŽ, ils gožtoient ensemble tout ce que la sociŽtŽ des
     esprits, et la vie raisonnable, ont de plus doux et de plus
     charmant" (_Relation_, p. 7).

     And even while Sprat was writing, the French were making up their
     scientific leeway. In 1664-65 there was published in English a
     translation of _A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi
     of France upon Questions of all Sorts of Philosophy and other_
     (sic) _Natural Knowledge made in the Assembly of the_ Beaux Esprits
     _at_ Paris, _by the most Ingenious Persons of that Nation_ (2 vols.
     sm. folio), wherein, though the scientific discussions are
     distinctly amateurish, there are many speculations likely to
     stimulate both French and English experiment. There is indeed
     little to choose in point of solidity between the early themes of
     the English Royal Society and those of the French Academy. On the
     other hand, the French Government specially promoted exact study.
     In 1666 Colbert established the _AcadŽmie Royale des Sciences_, for
     the promotion of Geometry, Astronomy, Physics, and Chemistry,
     building a laboratory and an observatory, and inviting to France
     Cassini and Huygens (Life of Colbert by Bernard, in ed. of
     Colbert's _Last Testament_, 1695). Colbert further founded the
     _AcadŽmie Royale d'Architecture_ in 1671; and had set up what came
     to be the _AcadŽmie des Inscriptions_ in his own house. All three
     bodies did excellent work. (See the acknowledgment, as regards
     science, in Lawrence's _Lectures on Comparative Anatomy_, etc.,
     1819, p. 13.) In France, besides, the philosophy and science of
     Descartes made way from the first, and it was his works that first
     gave Locke "a relish for philosophical things." On the other hand,
     Sprat, who was not without an eye to literature, and made a
     reputation by his style, acutely notes (p. 42) that "in the Wars
     themselves (which is a time wherein all Languages use, if ever, to
     increase by extraordinary degrees, for in such busie and active
     times there arise more new thoughts of some men, which must be
     signifi'd and varied by new expressions)" the English speech
     "received many fantastical terms ... and with all it was enlarg'd
     by many sound and necessary Forms and Idioms which it before
     wanted"; and he proposes an authoritative dictionary on the lines
     of the French project.

The English naturalists would have nothing to do with theology, "these
two subjects, God and the Soul, being only forborn."[1176] Reasoning
from the development of military faculty in the Civil War, they decided
that "greater things are produced by the free way than the
formal"[1177]--a principle already put forth by Renaudot, in the preface
to the reports of the French Academy, as the guide of their procedure.
By attending solely to results and questions of concrete fact, the
inquirers were "not only free from Faction, but from the very causes and
beginnings of it";[1178] and in the language of the time they held that
"by this means there was a race of young Men provided against the next
Age, whose minds receiving from them their just Impressions of sober and
generous knowledge, were invincibly arm'd against all the inchantments
of Enthusiasm"[1179]--that is, of religious fanaticism. And with this
recoil from fanaticism there went the stirring and energetic curiosity
of people habituated to action by years of war, and needing some new
excitement to replace the old. While many turned to debauchery, others
took to "experiment."[1180] Says Sprat:--

     "The late times of Civil War and confusion, to make some
     recompense for their infinite calamities, brought this advantage
     with them, that they stirr'd up men's minds from long ease and a
     lazy rest, and made them active, industrious, and inquisitive: it
     being the usual benefit that follows upon Tempests and Thunders in
     the State, as well as in the skie, that they purifie and cleer the
     Air which they disturb. But now, since the King's return, the
     blindness of the former Age and the miseries of this last are
     vanish'd away: now men are generally weary of the Relicks of
     Antiquity, and satiated with Religious Disputes; now not only the
     eyes of men but their hands are open, and prepar'd to labour; Now
     there is a universal desire and appetite after Knowledge, after the
     peaceable, the fruitful, nourishing knowledge; and not after that
     of antient Sects, which only yielded hard indigestible arguments,
     or sharp contentions, instead of food: which when the minds of men
     requir'd bread, gave them only a stone, and for fish a
     serpent."[1181]

Here too, then, there was reaction. It could not suffice to lift the
plane of national life, which was determined by the general conditions
and the general culture; nor did it alter the predominance of _belles
lettres_ in the reading of the educated; but it served to sow in that
life the seed of science, destined to work through the centuries a
gradual transformation of activity and thought which should make
impossible the old political strifes and generate new. Out of experiment
came invention, machinery, theory, new scepticism, rationalism,
democracy. It is difficult to measure, but not easy to over-estimate,
the gain to intellectual life from even a partial discrediting of the
old preoccupation with theology, which in the centuries between Luther
and Spinoza stood for an "expense of spirit" that is depressing to think
of. Down even to our own day, the waste of labour and learning
continues; but from the time when two-thirds of Europe had been agonised
by wars set up or stimulated by theological disputes, the balance begins
to lean towards saner things. The second generation after that in which
there arose a "free way of reasoning"[1182] saw the beginnings of
"Freethinking" in those religious problems which were for the present
laid aside, and the foundation of a new experiential philosophy. New and
great reactions against these were to come; reactions of endowed
clericalism, of popular sloth, of new "enthusiasm" generated in new
undergrowths of ignorance, of recoil from terrific democratic
revolution. But the new principle was to persist.


¤ 4

It is not easy, at this time of day, to accept as a scientific product
the confused theory of constitutionalism which gradually grew up in
English politics from William the Third onwards. The theory in all its
forms is in logic so invertebrate, and in morals so far from satisfying
any fairly developed sense of political justice, that we are apt to
dismiss it in derision. In so far, indeed, as it proceeds on a
formulation of the "social contract" it is always severely handled by
the school of Sir Henry Maine, which here represents the anxiety of the
upper classes since the French Revolution to find some semblance of
rational answer to the moral plea that all men are entitled to political
enfranchisement and social help on the simple ground of reciprocity,
supposed to be canonised for Christians in the "Golden Rule." Locke, of
course, was not thinking of the working mass when he wrote his Letters
on Government, any more than when he helped to draw up a constitution
for South Carolina endorsing slavery.[1183] But he was at least much
nearer rational morals than were his antagonists; the provisions for
liberty of conscience in the South Carolina Constitution are notably far
in advance of any official view ever previously promulgated; and in
subsuming the "social contract" he was but following Hooker and Milton,
and indeed adapting Aristotle, an authority whom Locke's later critics
are wont to magnify.

     Sir Frederick Pollock, in his _Introduction to the History of the
     Science of Politics_ (p. 20), assumes to have saved Aristotle from
     the criticism which assails the "social contract" theory, by saying
     that Aristotle regards a "clanless and masterless man" as a monster
     or an impossibility, whereas the "theorists of the social contract
     school" take such a man to be the social unit. There is really no
     reason to suppose that Aristotle would have denied a pre-political
     state of nomadic barbarism such as is vaguely figured by Thucydides
     (i, 2); and as a matter of fact he does expressly posit a process
     of society-making by compact, first by the utility-seeking
     combination of families in a village, later by the villages
     _joining themselves_ into a State, whose express purpose is "good
     life" (_Politics_, I, ii). It does not cancel this to say that
     Aristotle also makes the State "prior" in the rational order to
     man, for his "prior" (I, ii, 12-14) is not a historical but a
     metaphysical or ethical proposition. In the third book, again (c.
     9), he endorses a proposition of Lycophron which virtually affirms
     the social contract.

     And just as the school of Maine attacks the social contract theory
     for giving a false view of the origin of society, so did Bodin long
     ago, and at least as cogently, attack Aristotle and Cicero for
     defining a State as a society of men assembled to live well and
     happily. Bodin insists (_De la RŽpublique_, 1580, l. i, c. i, p. 5;
     l. i, c. vi, p. 48; l. iv, c. i, _ad init._ p. 350) that all States
     originated in violence, the earliest being found full of slaves. It
     is true that Aristotle at the outset implies that slavery is as old
     as the family, but he still speaks of States as voluntary
     combinations for a good end. As to the first kings he is also vague
     and contradictory, and is criticised by Bodin accordingly.
     Aristotle was doubtless adaptable to the monarchic as well as to
     the democratic creed; but Bodin's criticism suggests that in the
     sixteenth century he was felt to be too favourable to the latter.

     It may be worth while to remark that the notion of an unsociable
     "state of nature" prior to a "social contract" was effectively
     criticised by Sir William Temple in his _Essay upon the Origin and
     Nature of Government_ (1672). With a really scientific
     discrimination he points to food conditions as mainly determining
     gregation or segregation among animals, observing: "Nor do I know,
     if men are like sheep, why they need any government, or, if they
     are like wolves, how they can suffer it" (_Works_, ed. 1814, i, 9,
     10). In the next generation, again, the ultra-Hobbesian view was
     keenly attacked and confuted by Shaftesbury within a few years of
     Locke's death (_Characteristics_, early edd. i, 109-11; ii,
     310-21). As I have elsewhere pointed out (_Buckle and his Critics_,
     p. 395), the "contract" theory lent itself equally to Whiggism and
     to High Toryism.

     Towards the end of the eighteenth century we find the Radical
     Bentham (_Fragment on Government_, 1776) deriding it as held by the
     Tory Blackstone. But Rousseau himself (preface to the _Discours sur
     l'inŽgalitŽ_) avowedly handled the "State of Nature" as an ideal,
     not as a historical truth; and Blackstone did the same. It is
     therefore only a new species of abstract fallacy, and one for which
     there is no practical excuse, to argue as does the school of Maine
     (cp. Pollock, as cited, pp. 63, 75, 79, etc.) that the theories in
     question are responsible for the French Revolution in general, or
     the Reign of Terror in particular. Revolutions occur for reasons
     embodied in states of life: they avail themselves of the theories
     that lie to hand. The doctrine that "all are born equal" or "free"
     comes from the Institutes of Justinian, and is laid down in so many
     words by Bishop Sherborne of Chichester in 1536, and by the
     orthodox Spanish Jesuit Suarez early in the seventeenth century
     (_Tractatus de Legibus_, l. ii, c. ii, ¤ 3). The first-mentioned
     passage is cited by Stubbs, iii, 623-24, and the second by Hallam,
     _Literature of Europe_, iii, 160.

The derivation was bound to warp the theory; but such as it is, it
represents the beginning of a new art, and therefore of a new science,
of representative government. A variety of forces combined to prevent
anarchy on the one hand, and on the other the fatal consolidation of the
monarch's power which took place in France.[1184] The new English king
was a Protestant, and therefore religiously acceptable to the people;
but he was a Dutchman, and therefore racially obnoxious; for fierce
commercial jealousy had long smouldered between the two peoples, and war
had fanned it into flames that had burned wide. Further, he was a
"latitudinarian" in religious matters, and zealous to appoint
latitudinarian bishops; and the retirement from London forced on him by
his asthma deepened tenfold the effect of his normal coldness of manner
towards all and sundry. In the very Church whose cause he had saved, he
was unpopular not only with the out-and-out zealots of political divine
right, but with the zealous Churchmen as such, inasmuch as he favoured
the Dissenters as far as he dared. So hampered and frustrated was he
that it seems as if nothing but his rare genius for fighting a losing
battle could have saved him, despite the many reasons the nation had for
adhering to him.

One of these reasons, which counted for much, was the political effect
of a National Debt in attaching creditors as determined supporters to
the Government. The highest sagacity, perhaps, could not have framed a
better device than this for establishing a new dynasty; albeit the
device was itself made a ground of hostile criticism, and was, of
course, resorted to as a financial necessity, or at least as a resource
pointed to by Dutch example, not as a stroke of statecraft. What
prudence and conciliation could do, William sought to do. And yet, with
all his sanity and enlightenment, he failed utterly to apply his
tolerant principles to that part of his administration which most sorely
needed them--the government of Ireland. Even in England he could not
carry tolerance nearly as far as he wished;[1185] but in Ireland he was
forced to acquiesce in Protestant tyranny of the worst description. The
bigotry of his High Church subjects was too strong for him. On the
surrender of the last adherents of James at Limerick he concluded a
treaty which gave the Irish Catholics the religious freedom they had had
under Charles II when the Cromwellian oppression was removed; but the
English Parliament refused to sanction it, save on the condition that
nobody should sit in the Irish Parliament without first repudiating the
Catholic doctrines. This was not the first virtual breach of faith by
England towards Ireland; and it alone might have sufficed to poison
union between the two countries; but it was only the first step in a
renewal of the atrocious policy of the past.[1186]

At the Restoration the ex-Cromwellian diplomatists had contrived to
arrange matters so that the monstrous confiscations made under the
Commonwealth should be substantially maintained; though the settlement
of 1653 had been made in entire disregard of the Act of Oblivion by
Charles I in 1648; and though Charles II avowed in the House of Lords in
1660 that they had "showed much affection to him abroad." So base were
the tactics of the Protestants that many Irish were charged with having
forfeited their lands by signing under compulsion the engagement to
renounce the House of Stuart; while those who had compelled them to the
act now held the lands as royalists. But the decisive evil was the base
indolence of the King. As Halifax said of him, he "would slide from an
asking face";[1187] and what Clarendon called "that _imbecillitas
frontis_ which kept him from denying"[1188] made him solve the
intolerable strife of suitors by leaving possession in the main to those
who had it. The adventurers and soldiers finally relinquished only
one-third of their estates;[1189] and only a few hundreds of favoured
Irish were restored to their old lands, under burden of compensation to
the dispossessed holders.[1190]

When the resort of James II to Ireland gave power to the oppressed
population, it was a matter of course that reprisals should be
attempted. The English historian glibly decides that they should not
have been permitted; that the King "ought to have determined that the
existing settlement of landed property should be inviolable"; and that
"whether, in the great transfer of estates, injustice had or had not
been committed, _was immaterial_. That transfer, just or unjust, had
taken place so long ago that to reverse it would be to unfix the
foundations of society."[1191] Thus does the race which claims to be
civilised prescribe a course of action for that which it declares to be
uncivilised.[1192] It is further suggested that the English interest in
the Irish Parliament would have "willingly" granted James a "very
considerable sum" to indemnify the despoiled natives for whom during a
quarter of a century it had never moved a finger. There is not the least
reason to believe in any such willingness; and it was in the ordinary
way of things that the wronged race should not exhibit a moderation and
magnanimity of which the wrongers had never for a moment shown
themselves capable. The Irish Parliament of 1689, indeed, took care to
indemnify all purchasers and mortgagees, while dispossessing original
holders under the Cromwellian Settlement;[1193] but it passed an Act of
Attainder in the fashion of the age; and when the Protestant cause
triumphed, the revenge taken was a hundredfold greater than the
provocation.

It was the legislature, not the crown, that did the work. Under the
tolerant and statesmanlike King, the Irish Protestant Parliament
proceeded to pass law after law making the life of Catholics one of
cruel humiliation and intolerable wrong. There is nothing in civilised
history to compare with the process by which religious and racial hatred
in combination once more set the miserable Irish nation on the rack. The
extreme political insanity of the course taken is doubtless to be
attributed to the propagandist madness of James, who had just before
sought to give all Ireland over to Catholicism. Fanaticism bred
fanaticism. But the fact remains that the Protestant fanatics began in
the reign of William a labour of hate which, carried on in succeeding
reigns, at length made Ireland the darkest problem in our politics.

     Hassencamp (pp. 117, 125) insists that the penal laws "were not
     dictated by any considerations of religion, but were merely the
     offspring of the spirit of domination," citing for this view Burke,
     _Letter to a Peer_ (_Works_, Bohn ed. iii, 296), and _Letter to Sir
     Hercules Langrishe_ (_Id. ib._ p. 321). But this is an attempt to
     dissociate religion from persecution in the interests of religious
     credit, and will not bear criticism. Burke, in fact, contradicts
     himself, assigning the religious motive in an earlier page (292) of
     the _Letter to a Peer_, and again in the _Letter to Langrishe_ (p.
     301). When the Protestants went on heaping injuries on the
     Catholics in the knowledge that the people remained fixed in
     Catholicism, they were only acting as religious persecutors have
     always done. On Burke's and Hassencamp's view, persecution could
     never take place from religious motives at all. No doubt the race
     feeling was fundamental, but the two barbaric instincts were really
     combined. Cp. Macaulay's _History_, ch. vi (2-vol. ed. 1877, i,
     390-93).

As regards Irish trade, commercial malice had already effected all that
religious malice could wish. Even in the reign of Henry VIII a law was
passed forbidding the importation of Irish wool into England; and in the
next century Strafford sought further to crush the Irish woollen trade
altogether in the English interest, throwing the Irish back on their
linen trade and agriculture, which he encouraged.[1194] Strafford's
avowed object was the keeping Ireland thoroughly subject to the English
crown by making the people dependent on England for their chief
clothing; and to the same end he proposed to hold for the crown a
monopoly of all Irish trade in salt.[1195] Cromwell, on his part, was
sane enough to leave Irish shipping on the same footing as English under
his Navigation Act; but in 1663 the Restoration Parliament put Ireland
on the footing of a foreign State, thus destroying her shipping trade
once for all,[1196] and arresting her natural intercourse with the
American colonies. In the same year, a check was placed on the English
importation of Irish fat cattle: two years later, the embargo was laid
on lean cattle and dead meat; still later, it was laid on sheep, swine,
pork, bacon, mutton, and cheese. In William's reign, new repressions
were effected. The veto on wool export having led to woollen
manufactures, which were chiefly in the hands of Dissenters and
Catholics,[1197] the Irish Parliament, consisting of Episcopalian
landlords, was induced in 1698 to put heavy export duties on Irish
woollens; and this failing of its full purpose, in the following year
the English Parliament absolutely prohibited all export of manufactured
wool from Ireland.[1198]

To this policy of systematic iniquity the first offset was a measure of
protection to the Irish linen trade in 1703; and this benefaction went
almost solely into the hands of the Scotch settlers in Ulster.[1199]
Even thereafter the linen trade of Ireland was so maimed and restricted
by English hindrances that it was revived only by continual bounties
from 1743 to 1773. And this twice restored and subsidised industry, thus
expressly struck out of native and put in Protestant and alien hands,
has been in our own age repeatedly pointed to as a proof of the
superiority of the Protestant and non-Celtic inhabitants over the others
in energy and enterprise. As a matter of fact, many of the Scots who
benefited by the bounties of 1703 in Ulster had recently immigrated
because of the poverty and over-population of their own country, where
their energy and enterprise could do nothing. Irish energy and
enterprise, on the other hand, had been chronically strangled, during
two hundred years, by English and Protestant hands, with a persevering
malice to which there is no parallel in human history; and the process
is seen at its worst after the "glorious Revolution" of 1688.

     Modern English writers of the Conservative school, always eager to
     asperse Ireland, never capable of frankly avowing the English
     causation of Irish backwardness, think it a sufficient exculpation
     of their ancestors' crimes to say that Irishmen have not taken up
     the old industries since they have been free to do so. Thus the
     late Mr. H.D. Traill meets Irish comment on Strafford's treatment
     of the Irish woollen trade by saying that the complainants "in
     these days prefer other and less worthy industries to those which
     they have now been free to practise, if they chose, for
     generations" (_Strafford_, 1889, p. 137). This is a fair sample of
     the fashion in which racial and political prejudices prompt men
     otherwise honourable to devices worthy of baseness. It should be
     unnecessary to point out, in reply, that when the Irish industries
     had been so long extirpated as to be lost arts, it was simply
     impossible that they could be successfully restored _in
     competition_ with the highly developed machine industry of England.
     Other countries set up new industries under high protective duties.
     This Ireland could not do. But the most obvious considerations are
     missed by malice.

The beginnings of modern parliamentary government thus coincide with the
recommencement, in the worst spirit, of the principal national crime
thus far committed by England; and this not by the choice of, but in
despite of, the king, at the hands of the Parliament. In the next reign
the same sin lies at the same door, the monarch doing nothing. The fact
should serve better than any monarchic special pleading to show us that
the advance towards freedom is a warfare not merely with despots and
despotic institutions, but with the spirit of despotism in the average
man; a warfare in which, after a time, the opposing forces are seldom
positive right and wrong, but as a rule only comparative right and
wrong, evil being slowly eliminated by the alternate play of
self-regarding instinct. Gross and wilful political evil, we say, was
wrought in the first stages of the new progress towards political
justice. But that is only another way of saying that even while gross
political evil was being wrought, men were on the way towards political
justice. A clear perception of the whole process, when men attain to it,
will mean that justice is about to be attained.


¤ 5

Even while the spirit of religion and the spirit of separateness were
working such wrong in Ireland, the spirit of separateness was
fortunately defeated in Scotland, where it had yet burned strongly
enough to make perpetual division seem the destiny of the two kingdoms.
We learn how much political institutions count for when we realise that
in Scotland, just before the parliamentary union with England, there was
as furious an aversion to all things English as there has ever been
shown in France of late years to things German. The leading Scots
patriots were not only bitterly averse to union, but hotly bent on
securing that the line of succession in Scotland after Anne should not
be the same as that in England; this because they held that Scottish
liberties could never be secure under an English king. The stern
Fletcher of Saltoun, a Republican at heart, had to play in part the game
of the Jacobites, much as he abominated their cause. But both alike were
defeated, with better results than could possibly have followed on any
separation of the crowns; and the vehement opposition of the great mass
of the Scots people to the Parliamentary Union was likewise defeated, in
a manner hard to understand. The heat of the popular passion in Scotland
is shown by the infamously unjust execution of the English Captain Green
and two of his men[1200] on a charge of killing a missing Scotch captain
and crew who were not even proved to be dead, and were afterwards found
to be alive. The fanatical remnant of the Covenanters was as bitter
against union as the Jacobites. Yet in the teeth of all this violence of
feeling the Union was carried, and this not wholly by bribery,[1201] as
was then alleged, and as might be suspected from the analogy of the
later case of Ireland, but through the pressure of common-sense instinct
among the less noisy. There was indeed an element of bribery in the
English allowance of liberal compensation to the shareholders of the
African Company (better known as the Darien Company), who thus had good
cash in exchange for shares worth next to nothing; and in a certain
sense the reluctant English concession to Scotland of freedom of trade
was a bribe. But it is by such concessions that treaties are secured;
and it needed a very clear self-interest to bring round a Scotch
majority to union in the teeth of a popular hostility much more fierce
than is shown in our own day in the not altogether disparate case of
Ulster, as regards Home Rule. Burton and Macaulay agreed[1202] that the
intense wish and need of the Scottish trading class to participate in
the trade of England (as they had done to much advantage under Cromwell,
but had been hindered from doing after the Restoration) was what brought
about the passing of the Act of Union in the Scots Parliament. No doubt
the moderate Presbyterians saw that their best security lay in
union;[1203] but that recognition could never have overridden the
stiff-necked forces of fanaticism and race hatred[1204] were it not for
the call of plain pecuniary advantage. A transformation had begun in
Scotland. The country which for a hundred and fifty years had been
distracted by fanatical strifes, losing its best elements of culture
under the spell of Judaic bibliolatry, had at length, under the obscure
influence of English example, begun to move out of the worst toils of
the secondary barbarism, not indeed into a path of pure
civilisation--the harm had gone too deep for that--but towards a life of
secular industry which at least prepared a soil for a better life in the
centuries to come; and even for a time, under the stimulus of the new
thought of France, developed a brilliant and various scientific
literature. The Darien scheme may be taken as a turning-point in
Scottish history; an act of commercial enterprise then arousing an
amount of energy and sensation that had for centuries been seen only in
connection with strokes of State and sect. It is not agreeable to
idealising prejudice to accept Emerson's saying[1205] that the greatest
ameliorator in human affairs has been "selfish, huckstering trade"; but,
barring the strict force of the superlative, the claim is valid. It is
the blackest count in the indictment against England for her[1206]
treatment of Ireland that she deliberately closed to the sister nation
the door which the Scotch, by refusing union on other terms when union
was highly expedient in the view of English statesmen, forced her to
open to them.







