
CHAPTER I

THE IDEAS OF NATIONALITY AND NATIONAL GREATNESS


It lies on the face of the foregoing surveys that the principle which
gives mass-form to all politics--to wit, the principle of
nationality--makes at once for peace and war, co-operation and enmity.
As against the tendency to atomism, the tribal principle supplies
cohesion; as against tribalism, the principle of the State plays the
same part; and as against oppression the instinct of race or nationality
inspires and sustains resistance. But in every aggregate, the force of
attraction tends to generate a correlative repulsion to other
aggregates, and--save for the counterplay of class repulsions--the
fundamental instinct of egoism takes new extensions in pride of family,
pride of clan, pride of nation, pride of race. Until the successive
extensions have all been rectified by the spirit of reciprocity,
politics remains so far unmoralised and unrationalised.

The nullity of the conception of "race genius" has been forced on us at
every meeting with it. No less clear, on a critical analysis, is the
irrationality of the instinct of racial pride which underlies that
conception, and which is involved in perhaps half of the strifes of
tribes, States, and nations. Yet perhaps most of the reflections made by
historical writers in the way of generalisations of the history of
States and peoples are in terms of the fallacy and the irrationality in
question. And the instinctive persistence of both reveals itself when we
come to reflect on the fortunes of what we usually call the little
nations--employing a term which at once sets up a whole series of
partial hallucinations.

The main distinction between civilised nations being difference of
language, there has spontaneously arisen the habit of identifying
language with "race," and regarding a dwindling tongue as implying a
dwindling people. In the British Islands, for instance, the decline in
the numbers of the people speaking Celtic dialects--the Erse, the Welsh,
and the Gaelic--leads many persons, including some of the speakers of
those tongues, to regard the "Celtic stock" as in course of diminution;
and statesmen speak quasi-scientifically of "the Celtic fringe" as
representing certain political tendencies in particular. Yet as soon as
we substitute the comparatively real test of name-forms for the non-test
of language, we find that the Welsh and Gaelic-speaking stocks have
enormously extended within the English-speaking population, so that
"Welsh blood" is very much commoner in Britain than "Saxon," relatively
to the proportions between the areas and populations of Wales and
England, while "Highland blood" is relatively predominant in
"Saxon"-speaking Scotland; and "Irish blood" is almost similarly
abundant even in England, to say nothing of its immense multiplication
in the United States.

Enthusiasm for one's nation as such thus begins on scrutiny to resolve
itself into enthusiasm for one's speech; and as our English speech is a
near variant of certain others held alien, as Dutch and Scandinavian and
German, with a decisive control from French, enthusiasm for the
speech-tie begins, on reflection, to assimilate to the enthusiasm of the
district, the glen, the parish. Millions of us are at a given moment
rapturous about the deeds of our non-ancestors, on the supposition that
they were our ancestors, and in terms of a correlative aversion to the
deeds of certain other ancients loosely supposed to have been the
ancestors of certain of our contemporaries. Thus the ostensible entity
which plays so large a part in the common run of thought about
history--the nation, considered as a continuous and personalised
organism--is in large measure a metaphysical dream, and the emotion
spent on it partakes much of the nature of superstition.

How hard it is for anyone trained in such emotion to transcend it is
seen from the form taken by the sympathy which is bestowed by
considerate members of a large community on members of a small one.
"Gallant little Wales" is a phrase in English currency; and a
contemporary poet, who had actually written pertinently and well in
prose on the spurious conception of greatness attached to membership in
a large population, has also written in verse a plea for "little
peoples" in terms of the assumption of an entity conscious of relative
smallness. Some of these more sympathetic pictures of the lesser States
obscurely recall the anecdote of the little girl who, contemplating a
picture of martyrs thrown to the lions, sorrowed for the "poor lion who
hadn't any Christian." The late Sir John Seeley, on the other hand,
wrote in the more normal Anglo-Saxon manner that "some countries, such
as Holland and Sweden, might pardonably (_sic_) regard their history as
in a manner wound up; ... the only practical lesson of their history is
a lesson of resignation."[631] The unit in a population of three
millions is implicitly credited with the consciousness of a dwarf or a
cripple facing a gigantic rival when he thinks of the existence of a
community of thirty or sixty millions. Happily, the unit of the smaller
community has no such consciousness;[632] and, inasmuch as his state is
thus intellectually the more gracious, there appears to be some solid
psychological basis for the paradox, lately broached by such a one, that
"the future lies with the small nations." That is to say, it seems
likely that a higher level of general rationality will be attained in
the small than in the large populations, in virtue of their escaping one
of the most childish and most fostered hallucinations current in the
latter.

Certain patriots of the wilful sort are wont to flout reason in these
matters, blustering of "false cosmopolitanism" and "salutary prejudice."
To all such rhetoric the fitting answer is the characterisation of it as
false passion. Those who indulge in it elect wilfully to enfranchise
from the mass of detected and convicted animal passions one which
specially chimes with their sentiment, as if every other might not be
allowed loose with as good reason. Matters are truly bad enough without
such perverse endorsement of vulgar ideals by those who can see their
vulgarity. Ordinary observation makes us aware that the most commonplace
and contracted minds are most prone to the passion of national and
racial pride; whereas the men of antiquity who first seem to have
transcended it are thereby marked out once for all as a higher breed. It
is in fact the proof of incapacity for any large or deep view of human
life to be habitually and zealously "patriotic" in the popular sense of
the term. Yet, in the civilisations which to-day pass for being most
advanced, the majority of the units habitually batten on that quality of
feeling, millions of adults for ever living the political life of the
schoolboy; and, as no polity can long transcend the ideals of the great
mass, national fortunes and institutions thus far tend to be determined
by the habit of the lower minds.

It is pure paralogism to point to the case of a large backward
population without a national-flag idea--for instance, the
Chinese[633]--as showing that want of patriotic passion goes with
backwardness in culture. There is an infinity of the raw material of
patriotism among precisely the most primitive of the Chinese population,
whose hatred of "foreign devils" is the very warp of "imperialism." The
ideal of cosmopolitanism is at the other end of the psychological scale
from that of the ignorance which has gone through no political evolution
whatever; its very appearance implies past patriotism as a
stepping-stone; and its ethic is to that of patriotism what civil law is
to club law. If "salutary prejudice" is to be the shibboleth of future
civilisation, the due upshot will be the attainment of it one day by the
now semi-civilised races, and the drowning out of European patriotisms
by Mongolian.

If a saner lesson is to be widely learned, one way to it, if not the
best way, may be an effort on the part of the units of the "great
nations" to realise the significance of the fortunes of the "little
nations," in terms, not of the imagined consciousness of metaphysical
entities, but of actual human conditions--material, passional, and
intellectual. We have seen how erudite specialists can express
themselves in terms of the fallacy of racial genius. Specialists perhaps
as erudite, and certainly multitudes of educated people, seem capable of
thinking as positively in terms of the hallucinations of racial entity,
national consciousness, political greatness, national revenue, and
imperial success. Thus we have publicists speaking of Holland as an
"effete nation," of Belgium as "doomed to absorption," of the
Scandinavian peoples as "having failed in the race," and of Switzerland
as "impotent"; even as they call Spain "dying" and Turkey "decomposing."

Nearly every one of those nations, strictly speaking, has a fairer
chance of ultimate continuance without decline of wealth and power than
England, whose units in general show as little eye for the laws of
decline as Romans did in the days of Augustus. Spain has large
potentialities of rich agricultural life; Turkey needs only new habits
to develop her natural resources; the life of Belgium, indeed, is, like
that of England, in part founded on exhaustible minerals; but
Switzerland and Scandinavia, with their restrained populations, may
continue to maintain, as they do, a rather higher _average_ of decent
life and popular culture than that of the British Islands,[634] though
they, too, have at all times a social problem to deal with. British
greatness, on dissection, consists in the aggregation of much greater
masses of wealth and much greater masses of poverty, larger groups of
idlers and larger swarms of degenerates, with much greater maritime
power, than are to be seen in the little nations; certainly not in a
higher average of manhood and intelligence and well-being. Sir John
Seeley, in a moment of misgiving, avowed that "bigness is not
necessarily greatness"; adding, "if by remaining in the second rank of
magnitude we can hold the front rank morally and intellectually, let us
sacrifice mere material magnitude."[635] But he had before used the term
"greatness" without reserve as equivalent to "mere material magnitude";
and even in revising his doctrine, it seems, he must needs crave some
sort of supremacy, some sense of the inferiority of the mass of mankind.
Without any such constant reversion to the instinct of racial pride, let
us say that "the things that are most excellent" have no dependence on
mere material magnitude. Given a saner and juster distribution of wealth
and culture-machinery, each one of the smaller States may be more
civilised, more worth living in, than the larger, even as Athens was
better worth living in than Rome, and Goethe's Weimar than the Berlin of
1800. It was a poet of one of the larger nations--though it had to be a
poet--who saw not hardship but happiness in the thought of "leaving
great verse unto a little clan." And it was a Christian bishop, looking
on the break-up of a great empire, who asked, _An congruat bonis latius
velle regnare?_--Doth it beseem the good to seek to widen their
rule?--and gave the judgment that if human things had gone in the
happier way of righteousness, all States had remained small, happy in
peaceful neighbourhood.[636]

As for the sentiment of a national greatness that is measured by acreage
and census and quantity of war material, it is hard to distinguish
ethically between it and that individual pride in lands and wealth which
all men save those who cherish it are agreed to pronounce odious. Even
the snobs of nationality have, as a rule, a saving sense which withholds
them from flaunting their pride in the eyes of their "poorer"
neighbours, the members of the less numerous communities. Yet the note
which is thus tacitly admitted to be vulgarly jarring for alien ears is
habitually struck for domestic satisfaction; few newspapers let many
days pass without sounding it; and certain poets and writers of verse
appear to find their chief joy in its vibrations. The men of some of the
lesser States, then, stand a fair chance of becoming ethically and
¾sthetically, as well as intellectually, superior in the average to
those of the larger aggregates, in that their moral codes are not
vitiated nor their literary taste vulgarised by national purse-pride and
the vertigo of the higher dunghill; though they, too, have their snares
of "patriotism," with its false ideals and its vitiation of true
fraternity.

To some degree, no doubt, the habit of mind of our megalophiles connects
with the vague but common surmise that a small aggregate is more liable
to unscrupulous aggression than a large one. If, however, there be any
justice in that surmise, there is obviously implied a known disposition
in the larger aggregates to commit such aggression; so that to act or
rest upon it is simply to prefer being the wronger to being the wronged.
Thus to glory in being rather on the side of the bully than on the side
of the bullied is only to give one more proof of the unworthiness of the
instinct at work. All the while, there is no real ground for the hope;
and as regards the small nations themselves, the apprehension does not
appear to prevail. There has indeed been a recrudescence of the barbaric
ethic of the Napoleonic period in the Bismarckian period; but there is
no present sign of a serious fear of national suppression on the part of
Holland, Belgium, Switzerland, Portugal, and the Scandinavian States;
while, apart from Bismarck's early aggression upon Denmark, and the
ill-fortune of Greece in attacking Turkey, it is not small but large
aggregates--to wit, Austria, France, Russia, Turkey, Spain--that have
suffered any degree of military humiliation during the past half
century; and it is precisely the large aggregates that avowedly live in
the most constant apprehension either of being outnumbered in their
armies and navies by single rivals or coalitions, or of losing their
"prestige" by some failure to punish a supposed slight. It is a matter
of historic fact that the "patriotic" consciousness in England had its
withers wrung during a long series of years by the remembrance of such
military disasters as the fall of Gordon at Khartoum, and the defeat of
an incompetent general at Majuba Hill.[637] No "little nation" could
exhibit a more wincing sense of humiliation and disgrace than is thus
visibly felt by multitudes of a great aggregate over military repulses
at the hands of extremely small and primitive groups. Politically
speaking, then, the future of the small nations seems rather brighter
than that of the large; and thus in the last analysis the pride of the
unit of the latter is found to be still a folly.
