



CHAPTER II

THE REBELLION AND THE COMMONWEALTH


¤ 1

Nearly all the conceivable materials of disaffection, save personal
misconduct on the king's part,[1089] went to prepare the Great
Rebellion. Religious antipathies, indeed, no longer rested on the naked
ground of lands taken and in danger of being re-taken;[1090] but there
had been developed an intense animus of Protestant against Catholic, the
instinct of strife running the more violently in that channel because so
few others were open, relatively to the store of restless brute force in
the country. Perhaps, indeed, Presbyterians hated Episcopalians and
Arminians, at bottom, nearly as much as they did Catholics; but the
chronic panics, from the time of Elizabeth onwards, the mythology of the
Marian period, and the story of the massacres of Alva and of St.
Bartholomew's Day, served to unite Protestants in this one point of
anti-Papalism, and had set up as it were a new human passion in the
sphere of English politics. And to this passion James and Charles in
turn ran counter with an infatuated persistence. James, who was so much
more annoyed by Puritans than by Papists, planned for his son, with an
eye to a dowry, the Spanish marriage, which of all possible matches
would most offend the English people; and when that fell through,
another Catholic bride was found in the daughter of the King of France.
The pledges, so natural in the circumstances, to "tolerate" Catholics
in England, were a standing ground of panic to the intolerant
Protestants, even though unfulfilled; and the new king stood in the
sinister position of sheltering in his household the religion for which
he dared not claim freedom in the country. Such a ground of unpopularity
could be balanced only by some signal grounds of favour; but James and
Charles alike chose unpopular grounds of war, and failed badly to boot.
To crown all, they exhibited to the full the hereditary unwisdom of
their dynasty in the choice of favourites;[1091] and the almost
unexampled animosity incurred by Buckingham could not but reflect
somewhat towards Charles, whose refined and artistic tastes, besides,
made him the natural enemy of the text-worshipping and mostly art-hating
Puritans.

Thus everything made for friction between king and subjects; and when
Charles, to raise necessary funds, resorted to measures of no abnormal
oppressiveness as compared with those of the Tudors, he was doggedly
resisted by Parliaments professedly standing on law, but really actuated
by a fixed suspicion of all his aims. Teeth were on edge all round. When
a merchant, mulcted in a heavy customs duty, happened to be a Puritan,
he resisted with a special zest; and one such declared before the Privy
Council that "in no part of the world, not even in Turkey, were the
merchants so screwed and wrung as in England."[1092] The King, unhappily
for himself, conciliated nobody. Not content with alienating nobles by
imposing huge fines in revival of the forest laws, he incensed the
Corporation of London by confiscating their estates in Ulster, conferred
by his father, and levying a fine of £70,000 to boot, for alleged
breaches of Charter.[1093] Besides selling many trade monopolies, he
passed vexatious sumptuary laws, fixing the prices of poultry, butter,
and coals, and insisting on the incorporation of all tradesmen and
artificers.[1094] The friction was well-nigh universal; and but for the
remarkable prosperity built up by the long peace,[1095] the trouble
might have come much sooner. But it is idle to keep up the pretence that
what was at stake was the principle of freedom. The first demand of the
Parliamentary Opposition was for the more thorough persecution of the
Catholics. Parliamentarians such as Eliot were more oppressive in
religious matters than Laud himself. He sought only uniformity of
worship, they uniformity of doctrine; and they punished for heresy more
unpardonably than did the Star Chamber for gross libel.

     See Gardiner, _History of England, 1603-1642_, small ed. v, 191, as
     to Eliot's plans to fit out the fleet by means of "those penalties
     the Papists have already incurred"--a proposal which, says Dr.
     Gardiner, "if it had been translated into figures, would have
     created a tyranny too monstrous to be contemplated with
     equanimity." And Eliot was all for a persecution of the Arminians
     (_id._ vii, 42-43). In 1645 the Corporation of London petitioned
     Parliament to suppress "all sects without toleration."

Nor were they less oppressive in their fiscal policy. After beginning a
revolt against illegal taxation, Pym secured the imposition of taxes on
beverages (1643), on flesh, salt, textile goods, and many other
commodities, "at the sword's point," against the general resistance of
the people.[1096] There were at work a hundred motives of strife; and it
was only the preternatural ill-luck or unwisdom of Charles that united
Parliament against him so long. It needed all the infatuation of an
express training in the metaphysics of divine right to enable a king of
England, even after James I, to blunder through the immense network of
superstition that hedged him round; indeed, the very intensity of the
royalist superstition best explains the royal infatuation. So fixed was
the monarchic principle in the minds of the people, who, then as later,
swore by monarchy but hated paying for it, that in the earlier years of
the struggle not even the zealots could have dreamt of the end that was
to be. Regicide entered no man's mind, even as a nightmare.


¤ 2

On Charles, as the greatest "architect of ruin" in English political
history, psychological interest fastens with only less intensity than on
his great antagonist. The astonishing triple portrait by Vandyke
reveals, with an audacity that is positively startling when we think of
the other effigies by the same artist, a character stamped at once with
impotence and untruth. One slight suggestion of strength lies in the
look of grave self-esteem--a quality which would in Charles be fostered
from the first by his refined revolt from the undignified ways of his
father; but it is withal the very countenance of duplicity. Puritan
prejudice could not exaggerate the testimony of the daring artist. We
seem to understand at once how he deceived and alienated Holland and
Spain as well as the parties among his own subjects. And it was the very
excess of duplicity, or rather the fatal combination of duplicity with
infirmity of purpose,[1097] that destroyed the man. As the war wore on,
and above all after it was closed, the discords of the Parliament and
the army were such that the most ordinary practical sagacity could have
turned them to the triumph of the king's cause. This is the most
instructive phase of the Rebellion. The Presbyterian majority which had
grown up in Parliament--a growth still imperfectly elucidated--represented
only one of the great warring sects of the day; and if, after
Independency, led by Cromwell, had come to daggers drawn with the despots
of the Commons, Charles had only agreed to any working settlement
whatever, he might with perfect confidence have left the conflicting
forces to throttle each other afterwards. Any arrangement he might have
made, whether with the Presbyterians or with Cromwell, would
have broken down of itself, and he might have set up his own polity in
the end. But he so enjoyed his intrigues, as it were indemnifying
himself by them for his weakness of will, that he thought to triumph by
them alone, and would not wait for the slower chemistry of normal
political development; so that the Independents, driven desperate by his
deceits, had to execute him in self-preservation.


¤ 3

As it was, the history of the Rebellion remains none the less the
tragi-comedy of the old constitutionalism. Parliament, resisting as
illegal the supremacy of the king, went from one illegality to another
in resisting him, till his tyrannies became trivial in comparison. And
Cromwell, who must have set out with convictions about the sanctity of
law, although doubtless fundamentally moved by the all-pervading fear of
Popery, was led by an ironical fate, step by step, into a series of
political crimes which, if those of Charles deserved beheading, could be
coped with only in the medieval hell.

     Cp. Hallam, ii, 252; and Cowley's _Essays_, ed. 1868, p. 139 _et
     seq._ To say nothing of Cromwell's illegal exactions, his selling
     of at least fifty Englishmen into slavery in the West Indies (on
     which see Cowley, p. 168; Hallam, ii, 271, _note_; and Carlyle,
     _Letters and Speeches_, ed. 1857, iii, 100--where the victims are
     put at "hundreds")--albeit no worse than the similar selling of
     Irish and Scotch prisoners--was an act which, if committed earlier
     by any king, would have covered his name with historical infamy.
     Prof. Firth points out that the practice began under James I, but
     it was then applied only to felons and vagrants. Cromwell's example
     was followed under Charles II with regard to the Covenanting rebels
     in Scotland; and the plan was again followed in the cases of
     Monmouth's rebellion and that of 1715. (Cited in note on Lomas's
     ed. of Carlyle's _Cromwell_, ii, 438.) As regards Ireland, the
     selling of prisoners into slavery was not restricted to the case of
     the survivors of Drogheda (Carlyle's _Cromwell_, as cited, ii, 53;
     ed. Lomas, i, 469). It is proved that Cromwell's agents captured
     not only youths, but girls, for export to the West Indies
     (Prendergast, _The Cromwellian Settlement_, 2nd ed. p. 89); and
     that the slavery there was of the cruellest sort (Cunningham,
     _Growth of English Industry and Commerce_, ii, 109), though it has
     to be kept in view that it was not perpetual; the victim being
     strictly an "indentured labourer," only for a certain number of
     years at the mercy of his owner (Gardiner, _Commonwealth and
     Protectorate_, small ed. iii, 309-10, _note_; iv, 111-13). Of
     course the limitation of the term made the servitude all the more
     severe (Lomas's note cited).

     In the end, the Protector terrorised his own law courts as Charles
     had never dared to do. See Clarendon, bk. xv, ed. Oxford, 1843, p.
     862, and Hallam, ii, 253, 271, 272, _note_. Cromwell's language, as
     recorded by Clarendon, would startle some of his admirers by its
     indecency if they took the trouble to read the passage. Cp.
     Vaughan, _Hist. of England under the Stuarts_, etc., p. 524 (citing
     Whitelocke and Ludlow), as to the law courts. Vaughan overlooks the
     selling of royalists as slaves.

It was small wonder that posterity came to canonise the king; for in
terms even of the Roundhead principles of impeachment he was a political
saint in comparison with the "usurper." And royalists might well imagine
Cromwell as haunted by remorse; for nothing short of the "besotted
fanaticism" of which, as Hallam pronounces, he had sucked the dregs,
could keep him self-complacent over the retrospect of the Civil War when
he was governing by the major-generals, after failing to govern with
farcically packed Parliaments. His fanaticism was, of course, in the
ratio of his will-power, but each supported the other. The modern
exaltation of his character, as against the earlier and rather saner
habit of crediting him with great powers, relatively high purposes, and
great misdeeds,[1098] has tended to throw in the shade the blazing
lesson of his career, which is that, like most of his colleagues, he had
set out with no political insight or foresight whatever. His
conscientious beginnings are so utterly at issue with his endings that
it is indeed almost superfluous to condemn either--as superfluous as to
denounce the infatuation of Charles. But it is of importance to remember
that his very success as a Carlylean ruler only emphasises the failure
of his original politics. He succeeded by way of repudiating nearly
every principle on behalf of which he had taken up arms. Even apart from
the invigorating spectacle of his executive genius,[1099] he may well
stir our sympathy, which is more subtly and deeply exercised by his
inner tragedy, by the deadliness of his success in the light of his
aims, than by the simpler ill-fortune of Charles. But as politicians our
business is not to divide our sympathies between the powerful pietist
who was forced to give the lie to his life to save it, and the weak liar
who lost his life because he was at bottom faithful to his life's creed.
The superiority of Cromwell in strength of will and in administrative
faculty is too glaring to need acknowledging; and the lesson that a
strong man can tyrannise grossly where a weak man cannot tyrannise
trivially, is not one that particularly needs pressing. What it is
essential to note is that the course of events which forced and led
Cromwell into despotism was for the next generation a strong argument
against free Parliamentary government.

Our generation, proceeding mainly on the work of Carlyle, who never
really elucidates or even seeks to comprehend political and social
developments, has in large part lost sight of the fact that Cromwell was
more and more clearly becoming a military despot; and that with twenty
more years of life he might have established a new military and naval
empire. Yet at the time of his death his financial position was that of
a military adventurer at his wits' end, and his unscrupulous attack on
Spain was plainly planned by way of coming at money.[1100] Dr. Gardiner,
who has been the first English[1101] historian to handle the case with
comprehensive insight, rightly compares the position of Cromwell with
that of Napoleon. He was in fact just another sample of the recurrent
type of the military ruler establishing himself as despot on the ruins
of faction. "Except for four months ... the whole of the Protectorate
was a time either of war or of active preparation for war; and even
during those months the Protector was hesitating, not whether he should
keep the peace or not, but merely what enemy he should attack."[1102]
Finally he made war on Spain, by the admission of the friendly
historian, "after the fashion of a midnight conspirator," deceiving the
other side in order to gain a mean advantage.[1103] To such a policy
there was no limit in national conscience, any more than in his. He had
a standing army of 57,000 men, an immense force for the England of that
day; his revenue stood at two millions and a quarter, nearly four times
the figure of twenty years before; and still he was in desperate
financial straits, his outlays being nearly half a million in excess of
the income.[1104] The result was "a war for material gains"; and it
consists with all we know of history to say that with continued success
in such undertakings during a lengthened life he would have won the mass
of his countrymen to his allegiance.

A few dates and details make the process dramatically clear. Admiral
Blake won his first notable victory over Van Tromp in February, 1653;
and in April Cromwell felt himself in a position to expel the
recalcitrant Parliament, though that had always specially favoured the
navy. In this act he had the general approval of the people;[1105] but
he took care to change some of the naval commanders.[1106] The next
Parliament was the nominated one called the "Barebones," wherein none
were elected, and which went to pieces in the strife of its factions,
since even nomination could not secure concord among Puritans. Then came
the Parliament of 1654, elected from purged constituencies. From this
were excluded a hundred members who refused to sign an engagement not to
alter the system in force; and finally the remnant was angrily
dissolved, and military rule established under the major-generals. Yet
again, in 1656, driven by need of money, the Protector called another
packed Parliament, from which he nevertheless lawlessly excluded 102
elected members; and on their protesting there was a distinct increase
of the already obvious public displeasure at such repeated acts of
tyranny. This was in September; but in October came the news of
Stayner's capture of the Spanish treasure-ships; and in November the
treasure arrived--what the naval officers had left of it. On this the
Parliament promptly voted everything that its master asked for;[1107]
new taxes were laid to carry on the wanton war with Spain; and in
January 1657 it was proposed to offer him the Crown. Yet when, after a
six months' adjournment, that Parliament debated points on which he
wanted submission, he furiously dissolved it as he had done its
predecessors.

Such is the process of imperialism. With a few more years of ostensibly
profitable conquest, Cromwell, acclaimed and urged on in the career of
aggression by such different types of poet as Waller[1108] and
Marvell,[1109] would as a matter of course have been made king, with the
final consent of the army, and would have ruled as the crowned
imperator. In that case his Puritanism, instead of putting any
conscientious check on his egoism, would have fed it as Mohammed's faith
did his.[1110] Thus his early death was one of the important "accidents"
of history.[1111]


¤ 4

As it was, Cromwell lived only long enough to create an intellectual as
well as a conservative reaction. Surprise has been sometimes expressed,
and must have been oftener felt, at the virtual High Toryism of the
doctrine of Hobbes,[1112] who was so little conservative in his general
habit of mind. The truth is that in 1651, or at least in 1660, the
monarchism of Hobbes was the ostensible Liberalism of the hour.
Parliamentarism had meant first sectarian tyranny, then anarchy, then
military despotism; and there was not the slightest prospect of a
parliamentary government which should mean religious or intellectual
freedom all round. Hobbes would infallibly have been at least thrown
into prison by the Long Parliament if in its earlier time of power he
had published his remarks on the Pentateuch. They punished for much
milder exercises of critical opinion. A strong monarchy was become, from
the point of view of many enlightened men, positively the best available
security for general freedom of life, at a time when the spirit of
religion had multiplied tenfold the normal impulses to social tyranny
and furnished the deepest channel of social ill-will compatible with
national unity. It lay in Christianity, as it lay earlier in Judaism, to
breed an intensity of religious strife such as the pagan world never
knew. Various countries had seen sects arise and grapple with each other
on the score of this or that interpretation of the Hebrew sacred books,
and men of conservative bias felt that they were face to face with
insane forces incompatible with a democratic system. Religious lore,
above all other learning, could make men more "excellently foolish," as
Hobbes put it, than was possible to mere ignorance, making new and
uncontrollable motives to disunion.

It is not to be assumed, indeed, that a revolution begun on any motive
whatever would have maintained itself at the then developed stage of
political intelligence; for the English people, which constantly accuses
others of lack of faculty for union, had never shown itself any better
fitted for rational compromise than the Irish, given conditions of equal
stress. Scandinavian, German, Dutch, English--all the Teutonic sections
alike had in all ages shown in the fullest degree the force of the
primary passions of self-assertion and mutual repulsion, cordially
uniting only, if at all, for purposes of aggression. But in the case
under notice it was the religious passions that dug the channels of
strife; and they must be held to have added to the volume of blind
emotion. Thus intensified, the principle had shown itself potent to
wreck any commonwealth; and there remained only the choice between a
usurper governing through an army and a "legitimate" monarch governing
as of old by way of Parliament and a civil service. Parliament had been
the most offensive tyrant of all, for while making most parade of
legality it had been the most self-seeking,[1113] and perhaps even the
least respectable as regards its _personnel_. The Liberals of the
latter time had their cue given to them by the memorable Falkland, who,
grievedly "ingeminating Peace, Peace," had recoiled from the intolerant
Puritans, and sadly joined the intolerant Royalists. Macaulay's thrust
at him for this,[1114] if technically just, was hardly seemly on the
critic's part, for Falkland represented exactly the temper of Macaulay's
own politics. He was an ideal Whig of the later school--the very saint
of moderation. Falkland had indeed special ground for withdrawal from
the Puritan party, in that he was convinced that Hampden and Pym had
deceived him as to the king's complicity in the Irish Rebellion and
other matters. He had been "persuaded to believe many things which he
had since found to be untrue."[1115] But in most things the Puritans
must have jarred on him.[1116] Where he had consented to go, albeit
deliberately to his death, as a Cavalier, his disciples might well
become theoretic monarchists when the whole torrent of public opinion
went for the Restoration.

Of course, the hope of social freedom was destined to frustration under
the restored monarchy just as before, since there was still no culture
force sufficient to purify the animal instinct of antagonism. The
Restoration only meant that the Episcopalian dog was uppermost and the
Nonconformist under. But all the same, Commonwealth principles were
profoundly discredited; and it is notable that never since has
Republican principle ostensibly regained in England the stature it had
reached in the hotbeds of the Great Rebellion and the Protectorate. The
long struggle against the king had educated many of the strivers into
democratism, as did the later struggle of the American colonies against
George III. Even in the Parliament of Richard Cromwell, after Republican
hopes had been so blasted, there were forty-seven avowed
Republicans,[1117] the remnant of the breed. With the return of the
monarchy it virtually disappears from English politics for a hundred and
thirty years;[1118] when again it rises for a moment in the hot air of
the French Revolution, only to disappear again for nearly another
century. It was after the Rebellion, and not before, that the dogma of
divine right became completely current orthodoxy in England.[1119]


¤ 5

The collapse of Republicanism meant the collapse of the class politics
that had grown up in the war and in the Commonwealth alongside of the
creed politics. The creed politics itself, when carried to the lengths
of the doctrine of the Independents, meant a challenge to the political
system; and among the more advanced reasoners of the period were some
who saw that to put down kingly tyranny was of little avail while class
inequalities remained. The Long Parliament, though not going this
length, went far in the way of putting down some established abuses; and
there are many records of a more searching spirit of innovation. It is
important to realise that alike under Charles I and Cromwell the
Parliaments tended to be partly composed of and ruled by the more
audacious spirits of the time, simply because these had the advantage in
discussion wherever they were. The incapacity for speech which in later
times has made the Conservative party welcome adventurers as its
mouthpieces meant the partial obliteration of the conservative class in
the early days of unorganised parliamentary strife; and Cromwell's own
Parliaments baffled him in virtue of their large elements of upstart
intelligence. He himself, having entered the war from a mixture of
motives in which there was no idea of social reconstruction, was merely
irritated by the ideals of the more radical agitators, which he could
not out-argue, but on which he promptly put his foot. It is true that in
the immense ferment set up by the Rebellion impracticable ideas
abounded, and that they suggested risks of civil anarchy, even as the
multitude of sectaries threatened chaos in religion. We find indeed an
express affirmation of anarchism in the literature of the period;[1120]
and generally the English Revolution had in it most of the subversive
elements which later evolved the French, the determining difference
being that the English was not attacked from the outside. But there were
practical plans also. Lilburne had a really constructive scheme of
popular enfranchisement,[1121] which might have built up a democratic
force of resistance to royalism as such; but Cromwell, while ready to
overthrow any part of the constitution that hampered him, would build up
nothing in its place. He would have no alteration of the social
structure, save in so far as he must protect his Independents from the
Presbyterians and Episcopalians alike. And of course, when his polity
fell, the ideals of the independents of politics--who had represented
only a tribe of scattered intelligences, much fewer than the mere
religious sectaries, who were themselves but a vigorous
minority--speedily disappeared from English affairs. The standards of
the average orthodox class became the standards of public life.

On the side of international relations, finally, Cromwell and the
Commonwealth did nothing to improve politics. Commerce began to spread
afresh; and commercial and racial jealousy, under the Puritan as later
under the Restoration rule, bred war with the Dutch, just as religious
hatreds had made war between England and Spain. The final proof of
Cromwell's lack of political wisdom is given in his utterly fantastic
scheme for a constitutional union of the English and Dutch republics, a
scheme which could not have worked for a week. When this proposal was
declined by the Dutch States-General, he seems to have been as ready as
any filibuster in England to go to war with the States;[1122] and it is
evident that the Navigation Act of 1651 was at once an act of revenge
for the insults put upon the English ambassadors by the Dutch Orangeist
populace, against the will of the Dutch Government, and a wanton effort
to punish the States for declining the Protector's absurd
proposals.[1123] The two Protestant republics thereupon grappled like
two worrying dogs; and for their first ostensible victory the English
Parliament publicly thanked God as unctuously as for any of the
victories of the Civil War.[1124] In their hands and Cromwell's
international politics sank at once to the normal levels of primitive
instinct.

     Mr. Frederic Harrison (_Cromwell_, ch. xiii) glorifies Cromwell's
     foreign policy on the score that it made England great in the eyes
     of foreign countries. Exactly so might we eulogise the foreign
     policy of Louis XIV or Philip II or Napoleon--so long as it
     succeeded. Cromwell, up to the time when he began to scheme an
     empire of naval aggression, simply aimed at a Protestant
     combination as other rulers aimed at Catholic combinations. There
     was nothing new in the idea; and it would have been astonishing if
     he had _not_ maintained the naval power of the country. It was to
     this very end that the luckless Charles imposed his ship-money,
     which Hampden and his backers refused to pay. As regards home
     politics, again, Mr. Harrison praises Cromwell for preserving order
     with unprecedented success, making no allowance for the fact that
     Cromwell was the first Englishman who governed through a standing
     army, and making no attempt to refute Ludlow's statements (cited by
     Hallam, ii, 251, _note_; cp. Vaughan, p. 524, _note_) as to the
     gross tyranny of the major-generals, or to meet the charge against
     Cromwell of selling scores of royalists into slavery at Barbadoes.
     Mr. Harrison finally justifies Cromwell's policy in the main on the
     score of "necessity," despite the proverbial quotation. It was
     exactly on the plea of necessity that Charles justified himself in
     his day, when Cromwell joined in resisting him. Mr. Harrison again
     extols the "generosity" and "moral elevation" of the intervention
     for the Vaudois, when on the same page he has to admit the infamy
     of the Cromwellian treatment of Ireland. He sees no incongruity in
     Milton's emotion over the "slaughtered saints" of Protestantism,
     while Catholic ecclesiastics were with his approval being slain
     like dogs. Moral and social science must hold the balances more
     evenly than this.


¤ 6

While thus showing that in his foreign relations in general he had no
higher principle than that which led him to protect the Protestant
Vaudois, Cromwell himself could not or would not tolerate Catholicism in
England. What was immeasurably worse, he had put thousands of Irish
Catholics to the sword, and reduced tens of thousands more to the life
conditions of wild animals. His policy in Ireland, if judged by the
standards we apply to the rule of other men, must be pronounced one of
blind brutality. He had helped to make a civil war in England because
his class was at times arbitrarily taxed, and had fears that its worship
would be interfered with; and in so doing he felt he had the support and
sanction of Omnipotence. When it came to dealing with Irishmen who stood
up for their race ideals and their religion, he acted as if for him
principles of moral and religious right did not exist.[1125] His most
ferocious deeds he justified by reference to the Ulster massacre of
1641, as if all Irishmen had been concerned in that, and as if the
previous English massacres had not been tenfold more bloody. Under his
own Government, by the calculation of Sir William Petty, out of a
population of 1,466,000, 616,000 had in eleven years perished by the
sword, by plague, or by famine artificially produced. Of these, 504,000
were reckoned to be of Irish and 112,000 of English descent. And it was
planned to reduce the survivors to a life of utter destitution in
Connaught and Clare. By the settlement of 1653, ten of the thirty-two
Irish counties were allotted to the "Adventurers" who in 1641 had
advanced sums of money to aid in putting down the Irish Rebellion;
twelve were divided among Cromwell's soldiers; seven, with all the
cities and corporations of the kingdom, were reserved for the
Commonwealth; and three of the most barren counties--for the most part
unreclaimed--were left for the natives. The settlement could not be
carried out as planned by the Government, and as evidently desired by
Fleetwood, the Lord Deputy, and many of the officers. The very greed of
the soldiery defeated the project of a "universal transplantation," for
they were as eager for Irish labour as for Irish land.[1126] But the
confiscation of the land was carried out to the full, and multitudes
were forced into Connaught. The worst tyranny of Charles is thus as dust
in the balance with Cromwell's expropriation of myriads of conquered
Irish. For them he had neither the show of law nor the pretence of
equity. They were treated as conquered races had been treated, not by
the Romans, who normally sought to absorb in their polity the peoples
they overcame, but by barbarians in their mutual wars, where the loser
was driven to the wilderness. Far from seeking to grapple as a statesman
with the problem of Irish disaffection, he struck into it like a
Berserker, on the same inspiration of animal fury as took him into the
breach at Drogheda; and his or his officers' enactments, providing for
the slaughter of all natives who did not carry certificates of having
taken the anti-Royalist oath, are to be matched in history only with the
treatment of the conquered Slavs by the Christianising Germans in the
Dark Ages.

     Dr. Gardiner and Mr. Harrison partly defend the massacre of
     Drogheda as justified by the "laws of war" of the time. It is true
     that for the period it was not very much out of the way. The
     Royalist Manley, describing it, says only (_History of the
     Rebellions_, 1691, p. 227): "I would not condemn the promiscuous
     slaughter of the Citizens and Souldiers, of Cruelty, because it
     might be intended for Example and Terror to others, _if the like
     Barbarity had not been committed elsewhere_." But Manley seems to
     have forgotten the friars, whose slaughter neither laws of war nor
     European custom exonerated. There were really no "laws of war" in
     the case. Dr. Gardiner (_Student's History_, p. 562; _Commonwealth
     and Protectorate_, small ed. i, 118) puts it that these laws "left
     garrisons refusing, as that of Drogheda had done, to surrender an
     _indefensible_ post ... to the mercy or cruelty of the enemy." But
     it is unwarrantable to call Drogheda an "indefensible post." Dr.
     Gardiner's thesis that any captured post, however hard to take, is
     _ipso facto_ proved to have been indefensible, may be dismissed as
     a very bad sophism. Elsewhere he himself puts it (p. 132, _note_)
     that men "defending a fortified town _after the defences had been
     captured_" were liable to be slain--a very different thing.
     Drogheda contained 3,000 foot, mostly English, "the flower of
     Ormond's army," as Dr. Gardiner avows.

     Mr. Harrison (_Oliver Cromwell_, p. 136) perhaps errs in saying
     that its commander, Sir Arthur Aston, an officer of "great name and
     experience ... at that time made little doubt of defending it
     against all the power of Cromwell." Cp. Gardiner, _Com. and Prot._,
     small ed. i, 128, as to Aston's straits. It had, however, actually
     resisted siege by the Catholics for three years, and it was only by
     desperate efforts that Cromwell carried it. He went into the breach
     with the forlorn hope, and he gave the order for slaughter, as he
     himself admits, in the fury of action. The first order, be it
     observed, was to slay all "in arms _in the town_"--this at a time
     when men commonly carried arms in time of peace, and members wore
     their swords in Parliament. It simply meant a massacre of the male
     inhabitants. The garrison was not so slaughtered: when the
     surrender of the garrison came, Cromwell's blood-lust was slaked,
     and he spared all but every tenth man--for slavery in the
     Barbadoes. Nor did his men merely slay those taken in arms. He
     tells that "their friars were knocked on the head promiscuously";
     and it is impossible wholly to refuse to believe the royalist
     statement of the time, that men, women, and children were
     indiscriminately slaughtered. Dr. Gardiner, on somewhat
     insufficient grounds (_History of the Commonwealth_, i, 135, 136,
     _note_), entirely rejects the personal testimony of the brother of
     Anthony ˆ Wood (Anthony's _Autobiography_, ed. Oxford, 1848, pp.
     51, 52) as to Cromwell's men holding up children as shields when
     pursuing some soldiers of the garrison who defended themselves. Dr.
     Gardiner is himself in error in respect of one charge of
     improbability which he brings against the narrative, as quoted by
     himself. But in any case his own narrative, as he evidently feels,
     shows the Cromwellian troops to have been sufficiently ferocious.
     Quarter was promised, and then withheld (Gardiner, i, 117, _note_,
     118); and by Dr. Gardiner's own showing the "Parliamentary" account
     itself avows that the final surrender of the defenders on the
     "mount" was obtained by sheer treachery--a fact which Dr. Gardiner
     gloses even while showing it. A Puritan drunk with the lust of
     battle is a beast like any other. Cromwell himself had to quiet his
     conscience with his usual drug of religion. But if this act had
     been done by Cavaliers or Catholics upon a Puritan garrison and
     Independent priests, he and his party would have held it up to
     horror for ever.

     The only defence he could make was that this was vengeance for the
     great Irish Massacre--that is to say, that he had shown he could be
     as bloody as the Irish, who on their part had all the English
     massacres of the previous generation to avenge--a circumstance
     carefully ignored by clerical writers who still justify Cromwell in
     the name of Christianity, as seeking to make future massacres
     impossible. All the while, there was not the slightest pretence of
     showing that the garrison of Drogheda had been concerned in the old
     massacre. Compare, on this, the emphatic verdict of Dr. Gardiner,
     _History of the Commonwealth_, i, 139. Mr. Harrison (p. 145) quotes
     Cromwell's challenge to opponents to show any instance of a man
     "not in arms" being put to death with impunity--this after he had
     avowed the slaughter of all priests and chaplains! His general
     assertion of the scrupulousness of his party was palpably false;
     and it is idle to say that he must have believed it true. That
     Ireton's Puritan troops slew numbers of disarmed and unarmed Irish
     with brutal cruelty and treachery _against Ireton's reiterated
     orders_, is shown by Dr. Gardiner; and he tells how Ireton hanged a
     girl who tried to escape from Limerick (_Commonwealth_, ii, 48,
     53). Is it then to be supposed that Cromwell's men were more humane
     when he was hounding them on to massacre? As to the further
     slaughter of natives, there stands the assertion of Father French
     (_Narrative of the Earl of Clarendon's Settlement and Sale of
     Ireland_, Dublin, rep. 1846, p. 86) that under the Proclamation
     which commanded the soldiers to slay any men met on the highway
     without a certificate of having "taken the engagement" abjuring the
     monarchy, "silly Peasants who out of Ignorance or want of care ...
     left their tickets at home, were barbarously murdered." In the
     circumstances the statement is only too credible.

     There remains to be considered the old plea that the massacre of
     Drogheda made an end of serious resistance, and so saved life. Thus
     Carlyle: "Wexford Storm followed (not by forethought, it would
     seem, but by chance of war) in the same fashion; and there was no
     other storm or slaughter needed in that country" (_Cromwell_,
     Comm. on Letter CV). This is one of Carlyle's innumerable
     misstatements of fact. Even on his own view, the Wexford slaughter
     had to follow that of Drogheda. But, as Gardiner shows, Cromwell's
     bloodshed at Drogheda and Wexford, "so far from sparing effusion of
     blood," though "successful at Ross and at a few lesser strongholds,
     had only served to exasperate the garrisons of Duncannon, of
     Kilkenny, and of Clonmel; and in his later movements Cromwell,
     always prepared to accept the teaching of events(!), had discovered
     that the way of clemency was the shortest road to conquest" (_Com.
     and Prot._ i, 157; cp. p. 137). The laudation here too is
     characteristic; but it disposes of Carlyle's.

     Carlyle would never be at pains enough to check his presuppositions
     by the records. As Gardiner tells (p. 123, _note_), he denounces an
     editor for printing a postscript in which Cromwell admitted the
     slaughter of "many inhabitants" of Drogheda. This, said Carlyle,
     had no authority in contemporary copies. "It appears," writes Dr.
     Gardiner, "in the _official_ contemporary copy in _Letters from
     Ireland_." What is more, the editor in question had given the
     reference!

There are men who to-day will still applaud Cromwell because he quenched
the Irish trouble for the time in massacre and devastation; and others,
blenching at the atrocity of the cure, speak of it with bated breath as
doing him discredit, while they bate nothing of their censure of the
arbitrariness of Charles. Others excuse all Puritan tyranny because of
its "sincerity," as if that plea would not exculpate Torquemada and
Alva. The plain truth is that Cromwell in no way rose above the moral
standards of his generation in his dealings with those whom he was able
to oppress. He found in his creed his absolution for every step to which
blind instinct led him, in Ireland as in England; and it seems to be his
destiny to lead his admirers into the same sophistries--pious with a
difference--as served to keep him on good terms with his conscience
after suppressing an English Parliament or slaughtering an Irish
garrison.

     Take, for instance, the fashion in which D'AubignŽ shuffles over
     the Irish massacres, after quoting Cromwell's worst cant on the
     subject: "This extract will suffice. Cromwell acted in Ireland like
     a great statesman, and the means he employed were those best
     calculated promptly to restore order in that unhappy country. And
     yet we cannot avoid regretting that a man--a Christian man--should
     have been called to wage so terrible a war, and to show towards his
     enemies _greater severity than had ever, perhaps, been exercised by
     the pagan leaders of antiquity_. 'Blessed are the peacemakers: for
     they shall be called the children of God'" (_The Protector_, 3rd
     ed. p. 159).

It is too much even to say, as a more scrupulous critic has done, that
the phenomenon of the Commonwealth represented a great attempt at a
higher life on the part of men nobler and wiser than their
contemporaries.[1127] It was simply the self-assertion of energetic men
of whom some were in some respects ahead of their time; while the others
were as bad as their time, and in some respects rather behind it--men
bewildered by fanaticism, and incapable of a consistent ethic, whose
failure was due as distinctly to their own intellectual vices as to
their environment. No serious poetry of any age is more devoid of moral
principle than the verses in which Marvell and Waller exult over the
wanton attack on Spain, and kindle at the prospect of a future of
unscrupulous conquest. Both men were religious; both as ready to sing of
"Divine Love" as of human hate; and both in their degree were good types
of the supporters of Cromwell. The leaders from the very outset are
visibly normal agitators, full of their own grievances, and as devoid of
the spirit of fellow-feeling, of concern for all-round righteousness, as
any of the men they impeached. Their movement went so far as it did
because, firstly, they were vigorous men resisting a weak man, and later
their own natural progress to anarchy was checked by the self-assertion
of the strongest of them all. Thus their and his service to progressive
political science is purely negative. They showed once for all that an
ignorance guided by religious zeal and "inspiration" is more surely
doomed to disaster than the ignorance of mere primary animal instinct;
and that of the many forms of political optimism, that of Christian
pietism is for the modern world certainly not the least pernicious. The
Puritan name and ideal are in these days commonly associated with high
principle and conscientiousness; and it is true that in the temper and
the tactic of the early revolutionary movement, despite much dark
fanaticism, there was a certain masculine simplicity and sincerity not
often matched in our politics since. But as the years went on,
principles gave way, dragged down by fanaticism and egoism; and the
Puritan temper, lacking light, bred deadly miasmas. Milton himself sinks
from the level of the _Areopagitica_ to that of the _Eikonoklastes_, an
ignoble performance at the behest of the Government, who just then were
suppressing the freedom of the press.[1128] In strict historical truth
the Puritan name and the ideal must stand for utter failure to carry on
a free polity, in virtue of incapacity for rational association; for the
stifling of some of the most precious forces of civilisation--the
artistic; and further for the grafting on normal self-seeking of the
newer and subtler sin of solemn hypocrisy.

     This holds good of the Puritan party as a whole. It is possible,
     however, to take too low a view of the judgment of any given
     section of it. Dr. Gardiner, for instance, somewhat strains the
     case when he says (_Student's History_, p. 567) of the Barebone
     Parliament: "Unfortunately, these godly men [so styled by Cromwell]
     were the most crotchety and impracticable set ever brought
     together. The majority wanted to abolish the Court of Chancery
     without providing a substitute, _and to abolish tithes without
     providing any other means for the support of the clergy_." It seems
     clear that it was the intention of the majority to provide an
     equivalent for the tithes (see Vaughan, pp. 508, 509; cp. Hallam,
     ii, 243, 244); and the remark as to the Court of Chancery appears
     to miss the point. The case against that Court was that it
     engrossed almost all suits, and yet intolerably delayed them; the
     proposal was to let the other Courts do the work. Cp. Dr.
     Gardiner's _Commonwealth and Protectorate_, ii, 241, 262; and as to
     the tithes, i, 192; ii, 32, 240, 275, 276.

It would be hard to show that either Cromwell or the men he used and
overrode were, under trial, more conscientious than the average public
men of later times. Well-meaning he and many of them were; but, then,
most men are well-meaning up to their lights; the moral test for all is
consistency with professed principle under changing conditions. And
hardly one was stedfastly true to the principles he put forward. They
prevaricated under pressure--under harder pressure, no doubt--like other
politicians, with only the difference that they could cite random texts
and "the Lord" in their justification. And inasmuch as their godly
strifes were as blind and as insoluble as those of any factions in
history, they furnished no aid and no encouragement to posterity to
attempt anew the great work of social regeneration. If that is ever to
be done, it must be with saner inspiration and better light than theirs.
It is time that, instead of extolling them as men of superior moral
stature and inspiration, we now realise they brought to a bewildering
problem a vain enlightenment.

     On this view, it may be noted, we have a sufficient explanation of
     the dissimulations of which Cromwell was undoubtedly guilty.
     Between the antiquated asperity of Villemain, who, while extolling
     his capacity, charges him with _fourberie habituelle_ (_Hist. de
     Cromwell_, 5e Ždit. p. 272), and the foregone condonations of
     Carlyle, there is a mean of common sense. Cromwell was a man of
     immense energy and practical capacity, but with no gift for
     abstract thought, and spellbound by an incoherent creed.
     Consequently he was bound to come to serious confusion when he had
     to deal with tense complexities of conduct and violently competing
     interests. Coming into desperate positions, for which his religion
     was worse than no preparation, and in which it could not possibly
     guide him aright, he must needs trip over the snares of diplomacy,
     and do his equivocations worse than a more intellectual man would.
     Cromwell's lying sounds the more offensive because of its constant
     twang of pietism; but that was simply the dialect in which he had
     been brought up. Had he lived in our day he would have been able to
     prevaricate with a wider vocabulary, which makes a great
     difference.


¤ 7

Lest such a criticism should be suspected of prejudice, it may be well
to note that a contemporary Doctor of Divinity has at some points
exceeded it. It is Dr. Cunningham who argues that, in consequence of the
Puritan bias leading to a cult of the Old Testament rather than the New,
there occurred under Puritan auspices "a retrogression to a lower type
of social morality, which showed itself both at home and abroad."[1129]
He traces Puritan influence specially "(_a_) in degrading the condition
of the labourer; (_b_) in reckless treatment of the native [= coloured]
races; (_c_) in the development of the worst forms of slavery."[1130]
The present writer, who rarely finds it necessary to oppose a Protestant
clergyman on such an issue, is disposed to think the charge overdrawn,
for the following reasons: (1) The English treatment of Ireland was to
the full as cruel in the Elizabethan period, before Puritanism had gone
far, as under Cromwell; (2) the Catholic Spaniards in Mexico and Peru
were as cruel as the Puritan colonists in New England. It is true that
"in all the terrible story of the dealings of the white man with the
savage there are few more miserable instances of cold-blooded cruelty
than the wholesale destruction of the Pequod nation--men, women, and
children--by the Puritan settlers"[1131] of Connecticut. But when
Catholics and pre-Puritan Protestants and Dutch Protestants act
similarly, the case is not to be explained on Dr. Cunningham's theory.
The fallacy seems to lie in supposing that the New Testament has ever
been a determinant in these matters. Mosheim confesses that in the wars
of the Crusades the Christians were more ferocious than the
Saracens;[1132] and Seneca was at least as humane as Paul.

There is distinct validity, on the other hand, in the charge that
Puritanism worsened the life of the working classes, first by taking
away their ecclesiastical holidays and gild-festivals, and finally by
taking all recreation out of their Sunday. The latter step may be
regarded as the assertion of the economic interest of the Protestant
clergy against the social needs of their flocks. It was not that the
labourers were well off before the Rebellion--here again we must guard
against false impressions[1133]--but that "Puritan ascendancy rendered
the lot of the labourer hopelessly dull."[1134] There is reason to
believe, further, that the Stuart administration, applying the
Elizabethan Poor Law, took considerable pains to relieve distress,[1135]
and that the Commonwealth, on the contrary, treated the lapsed mass
without sympathy;[1136] and it is not unlikely that, as has been
suggested, this had something to do with the popular welcome given to
the Restoration.[1137] The conclusion is that "neither the personal
character nor the political success of the Puritans need lead us to
ignore their baleful influence on society,"[1138] which was, in the
opinion of Arnold, despite his passion for their favourite literature,
to imprison and turn the key upon the English spirit for two hundred
years. Here again the impartial naturalist will detect exaggeration, but
much less than in the current hyperboles to the contrary.

For the rest, the commercial and industrial drift of England, the resort
to the mineral wealth[1139] that was to be the economic basis of later
commerce and empire, the pursuit of capitalistic manufacture, the
building up of a class living on interest as the privileged class of the
past had lived on land monopoly--all went on under Puritanism as under
Catholicism,[1140] Anglicanism, Calvinism, Lutheranism. The early
Puritans, taking up the Catholic tradition, denounced usury; but the
clergy of industrial and burgher-ruled States, beginning with Calvin,
perforce receded from that veto.[1141] Even under Elizabeth there was a
good deal of banking,[1142] and under Cromwell English merchants and
money-dealers had learned all the lessons the Dutch could teach them,
weighing the Protector's borrowing credit in the scales of the market as
they would any other. The spirit of pitiless commercial competition
flourished alike under Roundhead and Cavalier,[1143] save in so far as
it was manacled by invidious monopolies; the lust of "empire" was as
keen among the middle class in Cromwell's day as in Elizabeth's and our
own; and even the lot of the workers began to approximate to its modern
aspect through the greater facility of transfer[1144] which followed on
the old rigidity of feudal law and medieval usage. The industrial age
was coming to birth.
