VII. TREATMENT OF INDIANS ABROAD


INDIANS ABROAD

The prejudice against Indian settlers outside India is showing itself in
a variety of ways
: Under the impudent suggestion of sedition the Fiji
Government has deported Mr. Manilal Doctor who with his brave and
cultured wife has been rendering assistance to the poor indentured
Indians of Fiji in a variety of ways. The whole trouble has arisen over
the strike of the labourers in Fiji. Indentures have been canceled, but
the spirit of slavery is by no means dead. We do not know the genesis of
the strike; we do not know that the strikers have done no wrong. But we
do know what is behind when a charge of sedition is brought against the
strikers and their friends. The readers must remember that the
Government that has scented sedition in the recent upheaval in Fiji is
the Government that had the hardihood to libel Mr. Andrew's character.
What can be the meaning of sedition in connection with the Fiji strikers
and Mr. Manilal Doctor? Did they and he want to seize the reins of
Government? Did they want any power in that country? They struck for
elementary freedom. And it is a prostitution of terms to use the word
sedition in such connection. The strikers may have been overhasty. Mr.
Manilal Doctor may have misled them. If his advice bordered on the
criminal he should have been tried. The information in our possession
goes to show that he has been strictly constitutional. Our point,
however, is that it is an abuse of power for the Fiji Government to have
deported Mr. Manilal Doctor without a trial. It is wrong in principle to
deprive a person of his liberty on mere suspicion and without giving him
an opportunity of clearing his character. Mr. Manilal Doctor, be it
remembered, has for years past made Fiji his home. He has, we believe,
bought property there. He has children born in Fiji. Have the children
no rights? Has the wife none? May a promising career be ruined at the
bidding of a lawless Government? Has Mr. Manilal Doctor been compensated
for the losses he must sustain? We trust that the Government of India
which has endeavoured to protect the rights of Indian settlers abroad
will take up the question of Mr. Doctor's deportation.

Nor is Fiji the only place where the spirit of lawlessness among the
powerful has come to the surface. Indians of (the late) German East
Africa find themselves in a worse position than heretofore. They state
that even their property is not safe. They have to pay all kinds of dues
on passports. They are hampered in their trade. They are not able even
to send money orders.

In British East Africa the cloud is perhaps the thickest. The European
settlers there are doing their utmost to deprive the Indian settlers of
practically every right they have hitherto possessed. An attempt is
being made to compass their ruin both by legislative enactment and
administrative action.

In South Africa every Indian who has anything to do with that part of
the British Dominions is watching with bated breath the progress of
commission that is now sitting.

The Government of India have no easy job in protecting the interests of
Indian settlers in these various parts of His Majesty's dominions. They
will be able to do so only by following the firmest and the most
consistent policy. Justice is admittedly on the side of the Indian
settlers. But they are the weak party. A strong agitation in India
followed by strong action by the Government of India can alone save the
situation.


INDIANS OVERSEAS

The meeting held at the Excelsior Theatre in Bombay to pass resolutions
regarding East Africa and Fiji, and presided over by Sir Narayan
Chandavarkar, was an impressive gathering. The Theatre was filled to
overflowing. Mr. Andrews' speech made clear what is needed. Both the
political and the civil rights of Indians of East Africa are at stake.
Mr. Anantani, himself an East African settler, showed in a forceful
speech that the Indians were the pioneer settlers. An Indian sailor
named Kano directed the celebrated Vasco De Gama to India. He added amid
applause that Stanley's expedition for the search and relief of Dr.
Livingstone was also fitted out by Indians. Indian workmen had built the
Uganda Railway at much peril to their lives. An Indian contractor had
taken the contract. Indian artisans had supplied the skill. And now
their countrymen were in danger of being debarred from its use.

The uplands of East Africa have been declared a Colony and the lowlands
a Protectorate. There is a sinister significance attached to the
declaration. The Colonial system gives the Europeans larger powers. It
will tax all the resources of the Government of India to prevent the
healthy uplands from becoming a whiteman's preserve and the Indians
from being relegated to the swampy lowlands.

The question of franchise will soon become a burning one. It will be
suicidal to divide the electorate or to appoint Indians by nomination.
There must be one general electoral roll applying the same
qualifications to all the voters. This principle, as Mr. Andrews
reminded the meeting, had worked well at the Cape.

The second part of the East African resolution shows the condition of
our countrymen in the late German East Africa. Indian soldiers fought
there and now the position of Indians is worse than under German rule.
H.H. the Agakhan suggested that German East Africa should be
administered from India. Sir Theodore Morison would have couped up all
Indians in German East Africa. The result was that both the proposals
went by the board and the expected has happened. The greed of the
English speculator has prevailed and he is trying to squeeze out the
Indian. What will the Government of India protect? Has it the will to do
so? Is not India itself being exploited? Mr. Jehangir Petit recalled the
late Mr. Gokhale's views that we were not to expect a full satisfaction
regarding the status of our countrymen across the seas until we had put
our own house in order. Helots in our own country, how could we do
better outside? Mr. Petit wants systematic and severe retaliation. In
my opinion, retaliation is a double-edged weapon. It does not fail to
hurt the user if it also hurts the party against whom it is used. And
who is to give effect to retaliation? It is too much to expect an
English Government to adopt effective retaliation against their own
people. They will expostulate, they will remonstrate, but they will not
go to war with their own Colonies. For the logical outcome of
retaliation must mean war, if retaliation will not answer.

Let us face the facts frankly. The problem is difficult alike for
Englishmen and for us. The Englishmen and Indians do not agree in the
Colonies. The Englishmen do not want us where they can live. Their
civilisation is different from ours. The two cannot coalesce until there
is mutual respect. The Englishman considers himself to belong to the
ruling race. The Indian struggles to think that he does not belong to
the subject race and in the very act of thinking admits his subjection.
We must then attain equality at home before we can make any real
impression abroad.

This is not to say that we must not strive to do better abroad whilst we
are ill at ease in our own home. We must preserve, we must help our
countrymen who have settled outside India. Only if we recognise the true
situation, we and our countrymen abroad will learn to be patient and
know that our chief energy must be concentrated on a betterment of our
position at home. If we can raise our status here to that of equal
partners not in name but in reality so that every Indian might feel it,
all else must follow as a matter of course.


PARIAHS OF THE EMPIRE

The memorable Conference at Gujrat in its resolution on the status of
Indians abroad has given it as its opinion that even this question may
become one more reason for non-co-operation. And so it may. Nowhere has
there been such open defiance of every canon of justice and propriety as
in the shameless decision of confiscation of Indian rights in the Kenia
Colony announced by its Governor. This decision has been supported by
Lord Milnor and Mr. Montagu. And his Indian colleagues are satisfied
with the decision. Indians, who have made East Africa, who out-number
the English, are deprived practically of the right of representation on
the Council. They are to be segregated in parts not habitable by the
English. They are to have neither the political nor the material
comfort. They are to become 'Pariahs' in a country made by their own
labour, wealth and intelligence. The Viceroy is pleased to say that he
does not like the outlook and is considering the steps to be taken to
vindicate the justice. He is not met with a new situation. The Indians
of East Africa had warned him of the impending doom. And if His
Excellency has not yet found the means of ensuring redress, he is not
likely to do it in future. I would respectfully ask his Indian
colleagues whether they can stand this robbery of their
countrymen rights.

In South Africa the situation is not less disquieting. My misgivings
seem to be proving true, and repatriation is more likely to prove
compulsory than voluntary. It is a response to the anti-Asiatic
agitation, not a measure of relief for indigent Indians. It looks very
like a trap laid for the unwary Indian. The Union Government appears to
be taking an unlawful advantage of a section of a relieving law designed
for a purpose totally different from the one now intended.

As for Fiji, the crime against humanity is evidently to be hushed up. I
do hope that unless an inquiry is to be made into the Fiji Martial Law
doings, no Indian member will undertake to go to Fiji. The Government of
India appear to have given an undertaking to send Indian labour to Fiji
provided the commission that was to proceed there in order to
investigate the condition on the spot returns with a favourable report.

For British Guiana I observe from the papers received from that
quarter, that the mission that came here is already declaring that
Indian labour will be forthcoming from India. There seems to me to be no
real prospect for Indian enterprise in that part of the world. We are
not wanted in any part of the British Dominion except as Pariahs to do
the scavenging for the European settlers.

The situation is clear. We are Pariahs in our own home. We get only what
Government intend to give, not what we demand and have a right to. We
may get the crumbs, never the loaf. I have seen large and tempting
crumbs from a lavish table. And I have seen the eyes of our Pariahs--the
shame of Hinduism--brightening to see those heavy crumbs filling their
baskets. But the superior Hindu, who is filling the basket from a safe
distance, knows that they are unfit for his own consumption. And so we
in our turn may receive even Governorships which the real rulers no
longer require or which they cannot retain with safety for their
material interest--the political and material hold on India. It is time
we realised our true status.