VICEROY'S SPEECH.


"A few Europeans and many Hindus, have been murdered, communications
have been obstructed, Government offices burnt and looted and records
have been destroyed, Hindu temples sacked, houses of Europeans and
Hindus burnt, according to reports Hindus were forcibly converted to
Islam and one of the most fertile tracts of South India is faced with
certain famine. The result has been the temporary collapse of the Civil
Government, the offices and Courts have ceased to function and ordinary
business has been brought to a standstill. European and Hindu refugees
of all classes are concentrated at Calicut and it is satisfactory to
note that they are safe there. One trembles to think of the consequences
if the forces of order had not prevailed for the protection of Calicut.
The non Muslim in these parts was fortunate indeed that either he or his
family or his house or property came under the protection of the
soldiers and the police. Those who are responsible for causing this
grave outbreak of violence and crime must be brought to justice and made
to suffer the punishment of the guilty.


Effect of violent preaching

"But apart from direct responsibility, can it be doubted that when poor
unfortunate and deluded people are led to believe that they should
disregard the law and defy authority, violence and crime must follow?
This outbreak is but another instance on a much more serious scale and
among a more turbulent and fanatical people, of the conditions that have
manifested themselves at times in various parts of the country and,
gentlemen, I ask myself and you and the country generally what else can
be the result from instilling such doctrines into the minds of the
masses of the people? How can there be peace and tranquility when
ignorant people, who have no means of testing the truth of the
inflamatory and too often deliberately false statements made to them,
are thus misled by those whose design is to provoke violence and
disorder. Passions are thus easily excited to unreasoning fury.


The Leader of the Movement

"Although, I freely acknowledge that the leader of the movement to
paralyse authority, persistently, and, as I believe, in all earnestness
and sincerity, preaches the doctrine of non-violence and has even
reproved his followers for resorting to it, yet again and again it has
been showed that his doctrine is completely forgotten and his
exhortations absolutely disregarded when passions are excited as must
inevitably be the consequence among emotional people.


Its inevitable result

"To those who are responsible for the peace and good government of this
great Empire and I trust that to all men of sanity and common sense in
all classes of society, it must be clear that the defiance of the
Government and constituted authority can only result in widespread
disorder, in political chaos, in anarchy and in ruin."




APPENDIX II

DIABOLICAL ATROCITIES.


Calicut, Sept. 7--In my first article I dealt with the prime causes of
the present outbreak, the dangerous game played by the leaders of the
Khilafat and Non-Co-operation movements in Malabar which set the whole
of Ernad and Walluvanad ablaze, and the extent of plunders, murders and
forcible conversions committed by the Mopla rebels. In this article I
intend to confine myself to the nature of the atrocities committed by
them and other details.

The experiences I am about to relate will satisfy every Hindu endowed
with ordinary common sense that the Moplas resorted to most repugnant
fanaticism, which may be ascribed to nothing but selfishness, love of
money and love of power, which are the prominent features of the present
outbreak. Refugees narrate that, after forcibly removing young and fair
Nair and other high caste girls from their parents and husbands, the
Mopla rebels stripped them of their clothing and made them march in
their presence naked, and finally they committed rape upon them. In
certain instances, devoid of human feelings and blinded by animal
passion, the Moplas are alleged to have utilised a single woman for the
gratification of the carnal pleasures of a dozen or more men. The rebels
also seem to have captured beautiful Hindu women, forcibly converted
them, pierced holes in their ears in the typical Mopla fashion, dressed
them as Mopla women and utilised them as their temporary partners in
life. Hindu women were threatened, molested and compelled to run
half-naked for shelter to forests abounding in wild animals. Respectable
Hindu gentlemen were forcibly converted and the circumcision ceremony
performed with the help of certain Musaliars and Thangals. Hindu houses
were looted and set fire to, will not all these atrocities remain as a
shameful image of the Hindu Muslim "unity", of which we have heard much
from the Non-Co-operation Party and Khilafat-wallahs? The ghastly
spectacle of a number of Hindu damsels being forced to march naked in
the midst of a number of licentious Moplas cannot be forgotten by any
self respecting Hindu, nor can it be erased from their minds. On the
other hand, I have never heard of the modesty of a Mopla woman being
outraged by a Mopla rebel. "_Times of India._"




APPENDIX III

MALABAR'S AGONY.


By Annie Besant

It would be well if Mr. Gandhi could be taken into Malabar to see with
his own eyes the ghastly horrors which have been created by the
preaching of himself and his "loved brothers," Muhommad and Shaukat Ali.
The Khilafat Raj is established there; on August 1, 1921, sharp to the
date first announced by Mr. Gandhi for the beginning of Swaraj and the
vanishing of British Rule, a Police Inspector was surrounded by Moplas,
revolting against that Rule. From that date onwards thousands of the
forbidden war-knives ware secretly made and hidden away, and on August
20, the rebellion broke out, Khilafat flags were hoisted on Police
Stations and Government offices. Strangely enough it was on August 25th
825 A.D. that Cherman Perumal ascended the throne of Malabar, the first
Zamorin, and from that day the Malayalam Era is dated that is still in
use; thus for 1096 years a Zamorin has ruled in Calicut, and the Rajas
are mostly Chiefs who for long centuries have looked to a Zamorin as
their feudatory Head. These are the men on whom the true pacification of
Malabar must ultimately depend. The crowded refugees will only return to
their devastated homes when they see those once more in safety in their
ancestral places. Their lands, which they keep under their own control,
are largely cultivated by Moplas, who are normally hardy, industrious
agricultural labourers.

Our correspondent has sent accounts of the public functions connected
with my hurried visit to Calicut and Palghat, and that which I wish to
put on record here is the ghastly misery which prevails, the
heart-breaking wretchedness which has been caused by the Mopla outbreak,
directly due to the violent and unscrupulous attacks on the Government
made by the Non-Co-operators and the Khilafatists and the statements
scattered broadcast, predicting the speedy disappearance of British
Rule, and the establishment of Swaraj, as proclaimed by the N.C.O. and
Khilafat Raj as understood by the Moplas from the declarations of the
Khilafatists. On that, there is no doubt whatever, so far as Malabar is
concerned. The message of the Khilafats, of England as the enemy of
Islam, of her coming downfall, and the triumph of the Muslims, had
spread, to every Mopla home. The harangues in the Mosques spread it
everywhere, and Muslim hearts were glad. They saw the N.C.O. preachers
appealing for help to their religious leaders, naturally identified the
two. The Government was Satanic, and Eblis, to the good Muslim, is to be
fought to the death. Mr. Gandhi may talk as he pleases about N.C.O.s
accepting no responsibility. It is not what they accept; it is what
facts demonstrate. He accepted responsibility for the trifling bloodshed
of Bombay. The slaughter in Malabar cries out his responsibility. N.C.O.
is dead in Malabar. But bitter hatred has arisen there, as fighting men
from the dragon's teeth of Theseus. That is the ghastly result of the
preaching of Gandhism, of N.C.O. of Khilafatism. Every one speaks of the
Khilafat Raj, and the one hope of the masses is in its crushing by the
strong arm of the Government. Mr. Gandhi asks the Moderates to compel
the Government to suspend hostilities, _i.e._, to let loose the wolves
to destroy what lives are left. The sympathy of the Moderates is not, I
make bold to say, with the murderers, the looters, the ravishers, who
have put into practice the teachings of paralysing the Government of the
N.C.O.'s, who have made "war on the Government" in their own way. How
does Mr. Gandhi like the Mopla spirit, as shown by one of the prisoners
in the Hospital, who was dying from the results of asphyxiation? He
asked the surgeon, if he was going to die, and surgeon answered that he
feared he would not recover. "Well, I'm glad I killed fourteen
infidels," said the Brave, God-fearing Mopla, whom Mr. Gandhi so much
admires, who "are fighting for what they consider as religion, and in a
manner they consider as religious." Men who consider it "religious" to
murder, rape, loot, to kill women and little children, cutting down
whole families, have to be put under restraint in any civilised society.

Mr. Gandhi was shocked when some Parsi ladies had their saries torn off,
and very properly, yet the God-fearing hooligans had been taught that it
was sinful to wear foreign cloth, and doubtless felt they were doing a
religious act; can he not feel a little sympathy for thousands of women
left with only rags, driven from home, for little children born of the
flying mothers on roads in refuge camps? The misery is beyond
description. Girl wives, pretty and sweet, with eyes half blind with
weeping, distraught with terror; women who have seen their husbands
hacked to pieces before their eye, in the way "Moplas consider as
religious"; old women tottering, whose faces become written with anguish
and who cry at a gentle touch and a kind look waking out of a stupor of
misery only to weep, men who have lost all, hopeless, crushed,
desperate, I have walked among thousands of them in the refugee camps,
and some times heavy eyes would lift as a cloth was laid gently on the
bare shoulder, and a faint watery smile of surprise would make the face
even more piteous than the stupor. Eyes full of appeal, of agonised
despair, of hopeless entreaty of helpless anguish, thousands of them
camp after camp, "Shameful inhumanity proceeding in Malabar," says Mr.
Gandhi. Shameful inhumanity indeed, wrought by the Moplas, and these are
the victims, saved from extermination by British and Indian swords, For
be it remembered the Moplas began the whole horrible business; the
Government intervened to save their victims and these thousands have
been saved. Mr. Gandhi would have hostilities suspended--so that the
Moplas may sweep down on the refugee camps, and finish their work?

I visited in Calicut three huge Committee camps, two Christian, and the
Congress building and compound where doles of rice are given daily from
7 A.M. to noon. In all, the arrangements were good. Big thatched sheds,
and some buildings shelter the women and children, the men sleep
outside. They are all managed by Indians, the Zamorini's Committee
distributing cloths and money to all, except the Congress committee,
which work independently and gives food from its own resource. At
Palghat, similar arrangements are made by the Zamorini's Committee, and
the order and care in feeding are good to see.

Let me finish with a beautiful story told to me. Two Pulayas, the lowest
of the submerged classes, were captured with others, and given the
choice between Islam and Death. These, the outcaste of Hinduism, the
untouchables, so loved the Hinduism which had been so unkind a
step-mother to them, that they chose to die Hindus rather than to live
Muslim. May the God of both, Muslim and Hindus send His messengers to
these heroic souls, and give them rebirth into the Faith for which they
died. _New India, 29 November 1921._

       *       *       *       *       *

Wilful murders of Hindus and arson were first begun in my own place by
Chembrasseri Thangal and his Lieutenant, another Thangal. You might have
read accounts written by me in the Malabar journal which was sent to you
last time. This contagion began to spread like wild fire and we began to
hear of murders daily. Within a fortnight cold-blooded murders of Hindus
became very common. From within the borders of Calicut and Ernad taluks
refugees come in large numbers with tales of murders and atrocities
committed by the rebels. At Puthur Amson in Ernad only 12 miles
northeast of Calicut--One day in broad daylight twenty-five persons who
refused to embrace Islam were butchered and put into a well. One out of
these who narrowly escaped death got out of the well when the rebels
left the place and ran to Calicut for life. He is now in the hospital.
So the accounts must be true as he himself was one of the victims.

During the last week news of numerous murders and forcible conversions
came from another quarter also, Mannur near Aniyallur and Kadalundi
railway station in Ernad taluk. This place also is only 14 miles away
from Calicut. Every train to Calicut was carrying with it daily hundreds
of refugees during the last week. If there were ten thousand refugees
fed by the Relief Committee last week, it must have fed fifteen thousand
this week. According to the statements given by them there must be at
least fifty murders and numerous cases of conversions and house-burning.
Can you conceive of a more ghastly and inhuman crime than the murders of
babies and pregnant women? Two days back I had occasion to read a report
given by a refugee in Calicut. A pregnant woman carrying 7 months was
cut through the abdomen by a rebel and she was seen lying dead on the
way with the dead child projecting out of the womb. How horrible!
Another: a baby of six months was snatched away from the breast of his
own mother and cut into two pieces. How heart-rending! Are these rebels
human beings or monsters? From the same quarters numerous forcible
conversions are also reported. One refugee has given statement that he
had seen with his own eyes that the heads of a dozen people were being
shaved by the rebels and afterwards they were asked to recite some
passages from the _Quran_. This he witnessed from a tree. I wonder what
is the authority of some people who contradict the news of murders, and
forcible conversions of Hindus. Let them come here and test the veracity
of these statements for themselves.

'Yesterday another report of murders came from a place very near
Kottakal. The report says that eleven Hindus (males and females), were
murdered by the rebels.

'A fortnight ago fifteen dead bodies of Hindus were seen under culvert
on the road between Perinialmanna and Melatur.'

Will you not be sick of these stories of murders? All these reports
are, as far as possible, proved also to be correct.

Words fail to express my feelings of indignation and abhorrence which I
experienced when I came to know of an instance of rape, committed by the
rebels under Chembrasseri Thangal. A respectable Nayar Lady at Melatur
was stripped naked by the rebels in the presence of her husband and
brothers, who were made to stand close by with their hands tied behind.
When they shut their eyes in abhorrence they were compelled at the point
of sword to open their eyes and witness the rape committed by the brute
in their presence. I loathe even to write of such a mean action. I thank
God that my family and relatives reached safe at Calicut without being
dishonoured by these brutes, though we sustained serious loss of
property and the loss of four lives (two servants and two
relatives,--More afterwards). This instance of rape was communicated to
me by one of her brothers confidentially. There are several instances of
such mean atrocities which are not revealed by people. _New India 6th
Dec. 1921._

       *       *       *       *       *

Truth is infinitely of more paramount importance than Hindu-Muslim unity
or Swaraj, and therefore, we tell the Maulana Sahib and his
co-religionists and India's revered leader Mahatma Gandhi--if he too is
unaware of the events here--that atrocities committed by the Moplahs on
the Hindus are unfortunately too true and that there is nothing in the
deeds of Moplah rebels which a true non-violent non-co-operator can
congratulate them for. What is it for which they deserve congratulation?
Their wanton and unprovoked attack on the Hindus, the all but wholesale
looting at their houses in Ernad, and parts of Valluvanad, Ponnani, and
Calicut Taliques; the forcible conversion of Hindus in a few places in
the beginning of the rebellion and the wholesale conversion of those who
stick to their homes in its later stages, the brutal murder of
inoffensive Hindus, men, women, and children in cold blood, without the
slightest reason except that they are "Kaffirs" or belong to the same
race as the Policemen, who insulted their Tangals or entered their
Mosques, the desecration and burning of Hindu Temples the outrage on
Hindu women and their forcible conversion and marriage by Moplahs; do
these and similar atrocities proved beyond the shadow of a doubt by the
statements recorded by us from the actual sufferers who have survived,
deserve any congratulation? On the other hand should they not call forth
the strongest condemnation from all right-minded men and more especially
from a representative body of Mohamedans like the Khilafat Conference
pledged to non-violence under all provocation? Did the Moplahs, who
committed such atrocities, sacrifice their lives in the cause of their
religion?

 (Sd.) +K. P. Kesahava Menon+,
 Sec. Kerala Pro. Cong. Comit.

 (Sd.) +K. Madhavan Nair+,
 Sec. Calicut Dis. Cong. Comit.

 (Sd.) +T. V. Mohamad+,
 Sec. Ernad Khilafat Comit.

 (Sd.) +K. Karunakara Menon+,
 Treas. Kerala Pro. Comit.

 (Sd.) +K. V. Gopal Menon.+

       *       *       *       *       *

Maulana Mohani justifies the looting of Hindus by Moplahs as lawful by
way of commandeering in a war between the latter and the Government or
as a matter of necessity when the Moplahs were forced to live in
jungles. Maulana perhaps does not know that in the majority of cases,
the almost wholesale looting of Hindu houses in portions of Ernad,
Valluvanad and Ponani Taluques was perpetrated on the 21st, 22nd, and
23rd of August before the military had arrived in the affected area to
arrest or fight the rebels even before Martial law had been declared.
The Moplahs had not betaken themselves to jungles at the time as Moulana
supposes nor had the Hindus as a class done anything to them to deserve
their hostility. The out-break commenced on the 20th of August, the
police and the District Magistrate withdrew from Tirunangadi to Calicut
on the 21st and the policemen throughout the affected area had taken to
their heels. There was no adversary to the Moplahs at the time whom the
Hindus could possibly have helped or invited, and the attack on them was
most wanton and unprovoked.

MADHAVAN NAIR.




APPENDIX IV

Proceedings of the conference at Calicut presided over by the Zamorin
Maharaja.


VI. That the conference views with indignation and sorrow the attempts
made in various quarters by interested parties to ignore or minimise the
crimes committed by the rebels such as

 _a._ Brutally dishonouring women;

 _b._ Flaying people alive;

 _c._ Wholesale slaughter of men, women and children;

 _d._ Burning alive entire families;

 _e._ Forcibly converting people in thousands and slaying those who
 refused to get converted;

 _f._ Throwing half dead people into wells and leaving the victims for
 hours to struggle for escape till finally released from their
 sufferings by death;

 _g._ Burning a great many and looting practically all Hindu and Christian
 houses in the disturbed area in which even Moplah women and children
 took part, and robbing women of even the garments on their bodies, in
 short reducing the whole non-muslim population to abject destitution;

 _h._ Cruelly insulting the religious sentiments of the Hindus by
 desecrating and destroying numerous temples in the disturbed area,
 killing cows within the temple precincts putting their entrails on the
 holy image and hanging the skulls on the walls and roofs.




APPENDIX V

Petition of Malabar Ladies to Lady Reading


 TO
 HER GRACIOUS EXCELLENCY
 THE COUNTESS OF READING,
 Delhi.

The humble memorial of the bereaved and sorrow-stricken
women of Malabar.

 MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACIOUS AND
 COMPASSIONATE LADYSHIP.

We, the Hindu women of Malabar of varying ranks and stations in life who
have recently been overwhelmed by the tremendous catastrophe known as
the Moplah rebellion, take the liberty to supplicate your Ladyship for
sympathy and succour.

2. Your Ladyship is doubtless aware that though our unhappy district has
witnessed many Moplah outbreaks in the course of the last one hundred
years, the present rebellion is unexampled in its magnitude as well as
unprecedented in its ferocity. But it is possible that your Ladyship is
not fully appraised of all the horrors and atrocities perpetrated by the
fiendish rebels; of the many wells and tanks filled up with the
mutilated, but often only half dead bodies of our nearest and dearest
ones who refused to abandon the faith of our fathers; of pregnant women
cut to pieces and left on the roadsides and in the jungles, with the
unborn babe protruding from the mangled corpse; of our innocent and
helpless children torn from our arms and done to death before our eyes
and of our husbands and fathers tortured, flayed and burnt alive; of our
hapless sisters forcibly carried away from the midst of kith and kin and
subjected to every shame and outrage which the vile and brutal
imagination of these inhuman hell-hounds could conceive of; of thousands
of our homesteads reduced to cinder-mounds out of sheer savagery and a
wanton spirit of destruction; of our places of worship desecrated and
destroyed and of the images of the deity shamefully insulted by putting
the entrails of slaughtered cows where flower garlands used to lie, or
else smashed to pieces; of the wholesale looting of hard earned wealth
of generations reducing many who were formerly rich and prosperous to
publicly beg for a piece or two in the streets of Calicut, to buy salt
or chilly or betel-leaf--rice being mercifully provided by the various
relief agencies. These are not fables.

The wells full of rotting skeletons, the ruins which once were our dear
homes, the heaps of stones which once were our places of worship--these
are still here to attest to the truth. The cries of our murdered
children in their death agonies are still ringing in our ears and will
continue to haunt our memory till death brings us peace. We remember how
driven out of our native hamlets we wandered starving and naked in the
jungles and forests; we remember how we choked and stifled our babies'
cries lest the sound should betray our hiding places to our relentless
pursuers. We still vividly realise the moral and spiritual agony that
thousand of us passed through when we were forcibly converted into the
faith professed by these blood thirsty miscreants; we still have before
us the sight of the unendurable and life long misery of
those--fortunately few--of our most unhappy sisters who born and brought
up in respectable families have been forcibly converted and then married
to convict coolies. For five long months not a day has passed without
its dread tale of horror to unfold.

3. Your gracious Ladyship's distracted memorialists have endeavoured
without exaggeration, without setting down aught in malice to convey at
least some idea of the indescribably terrible agonies which they and
thousands more of their sisters have been enduring for over five months
now through this reign of inhuman frightfulness inaugurated and carried
on in the name of the Khilafhat. We have briefly referred without going
into their harrowing details to our heartrending tale of dishonour,
outrage, rapine, and desolation. But if the past has been one of pain
and anguish, the future is full of dread and gloom. We have to return to
a ruined and desolated land. Our houses have been burnt or destroyed;
may of our breadwinners killed; all our property looted; our cattle
slaughtered. Repatriation without compensation means for us ruin,
beggary, starvation. Will not the benign Government come to our aid and
give us something to help us to begin life anew? We are now asked to
settle down as paupers in the midst of the execrable fiends who robbed,
insulted and murdered our loved ones--veritable demons such as hell
itself could not let loose. Many of us shrink from the idea of going
back to what there is left of our homes; for though the armed bands and
rebels have been dispersed the rebellion cannot be said to be entirely
quelled. It is like a venomous serpent whose spine has been partly
broken, but whose poison fangs are still intact and whose striking
power, if diminished, has not been destroyed. A few thousands of rebels
have been killed and a few more thousands have been imprisoned, but as
the Government are only too well aware many more thousands of rebels,
looters, savagely militant evangelists and other inhuman monsters yet
remain at large, a few in concealment, but most, moving about with
arrogance openly threatening reprisals on all non-moslims who dare to
return and resume possession of their property. Many refugees who went
back have paid for their temerity with their lives. In fact,
repatriation, if it is not to be a leap from the frying pan into the
fire, must mean for the vast bulk of your Ladyship's impoverished and
helpless memorialists and their families a hard inexorable problem of
financial help, and adequate protection against renewed hellish outrages
from which immunity would be utterly impossible as long as thousands of
men and even women and children of this semi-savage and fanatical race
in whom the worst instinct of earth hunger, blood-lust and rapine have
been awakened to fierce activity are free to prey upon their peaceable
and inoffensive neighbours who--let it be most respectfully
emphasised--because of their implicit trust in the power and the will of
a just and benign Government to protect them, had suffered their own art
and capacity for selfdefence to emasculate and decay.

4. We, Your Ladyship's humble and sorrow-stricken memorialists do not
seek vengeance. Our misery will not be rendered less by inflicting
similar misery upon this barbarous and savage race; our dead will not
return to us if their slayers are slaughtered. We would not be human,
however, if we could ever forget the cruel and shameful outrages and
indignities perpetrated upon us by a race to whom we have always
endeavoured to be friendly and neighbourly; we would be hypocritical if,
robbed of all our possessions we did not plead for some measure of
compensation to help us out of the pauperism now forced upon us; we
would be imbecile, if knowing the ungovernable, anti-social propensities
and the deadly religious fanaticism of the moplah race we did not
entreat the just and powerful government to protect the lives and honour
of your humble sisters who have to live in the rebel-ravaged zone. Our
ambition after all is low enough; sufficient compensation to save us and
our children from starvation, and enough military protection against
massacre and outrage are all that we want. We beseech Your Compassionate
Ladyship to exercise all the benevolent influence that you possess with
the government to see that our humble prayers are granted. But if the
benign Government does not consider it possible to compensate us and to
protect us in our native land we would most fervently pray that free
grants of land may be assigned to us in some neighbouring region which
though less blessed with the lavish gifts of nature may also be less
cursed by the cruelty and brutality of man.

 We beg to remain,
 Your Ladyship's most humble
 and obedient servants,




APPENDIX VI

ON NON-CO-OPERATION

BY M. R. JAYAKAR

[We take the following extracts from the Presidential address of Mr. M.
R. Jayakar at the Third Thana District Conference. Mr. Jayakar is a
well-known Non-Co-operator who believes in the "principles and policy"
of the movement and who joined the movement because he realised that
"Our quarrel with the bureaucracy was far more substantial than our
differences with the Congress Programme."]


The Failure of the Programme

The principles and the policy of the movement (N.C.O.) are substantially
sound and have achieved unexpected success. But, with every month that
has passed, the need has been felt in many quarters of revising and
adjusting the programme in the light of previous experience. When
dispassionately judged by such experience it will be found that some
details of the congress programme have not achieved the desired success;
on the contrary, they have formed weak links in the main. When these
items were undertaken they evoked a large volume of adverse criticism in
the ranks of Congress workers. Many of them have, no doubt, subordinated
their differences, out of loyalty to the main cause, and quite a large
number, out of their esteem and regard for the personality of the
selfless and saintly promoter of the movement. But, notwithstanding this
admirable display of loyalty among Congress men, the fact remains and
has to be reckoned with, that many items have proved unsuccessful and
perhaps act, in consequence as a clog on the movement. The soreness,
which some of these details have caused, still remains and is operating
to undivide some from others and makes them lukewarm or unwilling to
throw their whole heart into this movement. If these co-workers of ours
could be placated by a revision of the Congress programme, so that most
of the earnest-minded workers for cause could substantially agree to its
adoption, it would be a great advantage. And herein perhaps, lay the
chief merit of the amendment moved by Mr. B. C. Pal, which was rejected
by the majority at Calcutta. Taken at its highest, our success has not
gone much beyond what that amendment would have made possible. It would
have had the further advantage of retaining within our ranks many of our
former associates, who are, at present, either lukewarm or hostile.


Experiment in youthful sacrifice

When once the necessity is recognized of revising the programme in the
light of these comments, which are being made throughout the country, it
will not be difficult to find out in what directions the programme has
not achieved the expected success and the reasons for the same. For
instance, the boycott of schools and colleges have not succeeded and
even persons, of known and undoubted loyalty to the cause, complain that
the action of Congress workers has caused more harm than good. They
concentrated too much on the disruption of existing institutions and
less on the creation and maintenance of new ones on "national" lines.
They forgot that a student cannot be left idle in the street and that,
if the Congress must call him out, it can only be after it has provided
for him a good substitute. In Bombay we let pass the psychological
moment when we could have founded and reared up an excellent college
with various branches. Public enthusiasm was ripe for it in the early
part of the year, but we let it evaporate in declamation and emotional
exaltation. Some went so far as to suggest that it was no part of the
Congress programme to start national Colleges though the terms of the
Congress Resolution specially provided for it. 50000 boys are out in
idleness, says Sir Ashutosh Mukherji, some may glorify in this
catastrophe, but there are many who regard this disruptive event with
sad dismay. We have experimented too much in youthful sacrifice. Our
youth have reciprocated with more love and tenderness than we have shown
for their welfare. The few good institutions which Congress workers have
created, are suffering from our neglect and apathy and dragging a weary
existence. The shadow of a name has, very often been pursued, to the
abandonment of the substance, and we now find a large number of boys in
the country, who are practically loafing in the streets, with a vague
ambition "to do something patriotic".


The Lawyer-Failure

Our ban on lawyers has, likewise, not attained much success. Few
lawyers, whose sacrifice of their practice has added strength to the
Congress cause, have responded to the call. The prestige of British
court in _civil_ Suits between an _Indian and Indian_ has not been
destroyed and can not be so easily destroyed; for, ordinarily this
variety of legal contests is not much colored with injustice, as
political trials are. If lawyers had been called out, because, being a
trained class of workers, the country wanted their undivided time and
attention at this critical hour, it would have been a different matter,
and, perhaps, if the call had been so made many, many more would have
responded to it. But it was put the wrong way, and the lawyer was made
to appear as if, in pursuing his profession, he was acting sinfully and
must atone for it by a complete withdrawal from practice. The result was
that, out of sheer self-respect, many really good lawyers have declined
to respond to the call. Many could not give up their practice for
pecuniary reasons and were too honest to adopt subterfuges calculated to
create a semblance of sacrifice. Lawyers have become "pariahs" of our
present political life. Some of them had borne the brunt of public
agitation for more than two decades; their place is vacant and no class
of workers of equal intelligence and keenness has come forward to take
it.


A Foul Atmosphere

This part of the Congress programme has created a foul atmosphere of
hypocrisy, intolerance, imposture and conceit in the Congress Camp, in
which modesty, self-respect, and honesty often time find it hard to hold
their place. In our enthusiasm, we forget that many lawyers value their
profession for the training it affords in courage, truthfulness, honor
and toleration. No other profession trains a young man so well to
withstand and expose injustice and to uphold the tradition of truth and
honor. Our past political history of thirty-three years is a brilliant
record of the services rendered by lawyers to the Congress cause. If a
greater sacrifice than before was needed now on their part, a direct
call on their self-respect and patriotism on this footing should have
been made, but no good has arisen from putting the lawyer under the ban
of ridicule and infamy. The call made upon them was singularly harsh. No
other class of public workers was required to give up his means of
livelihood. The importing merchant supports British prestige as much as,
if not more than the lawyer and yet he stalks unabashed in the Congress
camp without closing his shop. No ban was put on litigants, without whom
the lawyer cannot thrive. I am therefore, surprised that notwithstanding
so much hardship, so many lawyers have come out and are to be found in
the vanguard of the movement. The few courts of justice, we called into
existence have not had enough support and are a mockery.


Revise the Programme

The failure of these parts of the programme is now practically admitted
and they are now pushed into the background. It would be better if, in
revising the programme in the next Session of the Congress, these limbs,
which have ceased to function or respond to the laws of our growth, are
boldly amputated. In any event, they make clear the necessity of a
revision, so as to render the programme more effective, elastic and
practical.


Enter the Councils

The fight requires to be carried on in manifold ways. Some may carry it
in the Councils, face to face with the officials. Why cannot
"Non-Co-operation," in its proper sense, be practised in the Councils?
Sir P. M. Mehta, when he left the Council Hall with his colleagues on a
memorable occasion when he, face to face with the then home member,
mercilessly uncloacked the preposterous pretensions of the bureaucracy,
was fighting with weapons and a spirit which many Non-Co-operators of
the true and accredited brand may envy in these days. If
Non-Co-operation is an _attitude_ of the mind, as its eminent author
conceives it, and not so much a programme or a creed, a Council Hall is
as fitting a place for its display as a mass meeting in a Marwadi
Vidyalaya. The spirit resides in the mind and is independent of the
environment. It is no ground to say that, often times, the environment
frightens a weakling, for we do not build our doctrines only on the
possibility of men being weak and timid.


N.C.O. Concession

We have already departed from the original rigor of our programme in
this behalf. A Non-Co-operator can now compete at Municipal elections.
He can offer advice to Government in or outside private interviews.
Non-co-operator papers do report the proceedings of the Legislative
Bodies, comment on them, and suggest remedies for the benefit of the
Government. Scarcely a non-Co-operator now-a-days speaks without
referring to gubernatorial utterances and orders in Council. He comments
on the policies of Government, suggesting remedies as he goes on with
his comments. Several lawyers in Bombay, who are still in practice, are
now allowed to occupy prominent places as speakers at Non-Co-operation
meetings. This is as it should be, for we cannot afford to ignore or
despise, in the stinted state as our resources, the co-operation of any
honest workers, prepared to make a sacrifice commensurate with his
capacity. This is all done now silently and as a concession. My plea is
for making the programme so wide, elastic and natural, as to turn these
concessions into acknowledged rights. The Congress Creed calls upon us
to obtain Swaraj by all legitimate and peaceful means. All weapons, all
avenues of work and all manner of public workers are enjoined on us, for
the attainment of the common end. Why set up ascetic standards,
unpractical tests, and unnatural bans, which may often let in the
dishonest but keep out the honest man, whose co-operation, even with a
difference, is often worth loving. The programme may become
theoretically less perfect, perhaps logically less consistent, but it
will certainly be more natural, real and effective.


Suggested Modifications

The exact form of the modification must be left to future discussion. I
would, therefore, suggest as follows:

(1) That foreign propaganda, so summarily put an end to at the last
Congress, be resumed and if possible extended within proper bounds. The
Indian view has to be put forward before the civilised world. This is an
urgent need of the hour. The Government are doing it from their own
point of view, and we ought to do the same from ours.

(2) That the time limited be abandoned, for reasons mentioned in para 25
below.

(3) That the elections to Legislative Bodies, whenever a chance should
occur, should be contested perhaps with the limitation, that in the
Provinces, unless complete autonomy is introduced, Congressmen should
not accept office under the present system of Government. This may be,
if so desired, made conditional on Government agreeing to dissolve the
present Bodies.

(4) A large modification of the educational boycott, including the total
abrogation of the compulsory part of it. Attention should be
concentrated more on the creation of national institutions than on the
withdrawal of students as a set propaganda. When such institutions are
projected, and some of them actually in existence, and they compete
favorably with state aided institutions, I have no doubt that sufficient
impulses have been generated in the country to secure the exercise of
the option in favor of the former. Side by side with this, an intensive
propaganda should be carried on in the Councils and outside, having for
its object the popularisation of the Universities by a change of the Act
governing them, and also the "nationalisation" of the existing system of
state-aided education, so as to bring it into greater accord with the
present-day requirements and aspirations of the people. To me, it seems
to be such a pity that we have deserted this avenue of agitation, to be
feebly utilised by a few persons in the present Councils, struggling
against an unsuitable environment. Nine crores, which is nearly the
total output on State education, we are not in a position to despise,
and it seems wrong to wait for this reform till complete Swarajya is
attained, which may or may not be for some time yet. Considerable harm
has been done to the cause of education by the exclusion of this avenue
work from the programme of Congress activities. The fate of primary
education in the Bombay presidency will clearly illustrate the point I
am making.

(5) A large modification of the ban against lawyers, so as to admit of
several grades of sacrifice from complete abstention from practice to a
giving up of the entirety or a part of the earnings. A way should be
found for getting as many lawyers as possible to work in this movement
provided they are prepared to give the cause at least a part of their
time or money. The Congress ought to modify its call, so as to make it
possible for all honest-minded lawyers to bear the burden of the
country's cause, commensurate with their capacity to sacrifice.

Similarly, in the matter of conducting defences in British courts, some
curious departure have come to be made from the strict Congress rule.
These departures only indicate that, in its operation, the rule has been
found unpractical and irksome. Congressmen are not to engage pleaders
nor offer a defence with legal aid. They are simply to make a
"statement." A statement is as much an aid to the administration of
justice as a lawyer-made defence, and in so far, it equally supports the
prestige of British courts. Only, it has the disadvantage of being
prolix and unconvincing. It, therefore, fails of its mark more often
than a lawyer's defence.

Who can urge that the long and interesting statements made by the Ali
Brothers and their co-accused, in the trial at Karachi were out of
place? Yet they had all the features of a lawyer-made defence, as an aid
to the court. The evidence was discussed, legal objections raised,
relevancy commented on and the prosecution evidence answered. All this
assistance was given to the court, helping it to arrive at truth and
justice, precisely in the same way as a practising lawyer aids judicial
administration.

If a statement is permitted, why cannot a lawyer be employed in Court to
make it more convincing and exculpatory? A statement must be based on
facts, and these facts become material only when proved. On what
rational grounds can, therefore, a statement permitted and yet the
material evidence supporting it disallowed? It is no answer to say that
the statement is meant for the guidance of the _Swaraj_ Courts when the
same are established, for when that eventuality happens, a statement
supported by evidence will be any a better help to these Swaraj Courts
than a mere statement? It is obvious that no Swaraj Court will liberate
a man merely on his own statement, without further inquiry.


Civil Disobedience

We are on the eve of Mahatma Gandhi undertaking an important part of his
programme by starting Civil Disobedience in a district in Surat. It is
very difficult to offer any useful comment on this undertaking because
beyond the general lines, his programme in its detail is not yet before
the Country. We can only hope that the resistance to law will not be so
undertaken as to be widely interpreted as a sort of charter for general
lawlessness. That would be a catastrophe for which the country is not
prepared. This seems also to be Mr. Gandhi's opinion, for he has very
prudently circumscribed the practice of the resistance with very severe
restrictions, involving a moral and economic preparation. To disobey
specific orders of Government or their officials, which have no moral
sanction behind them or are illegal in their inception, is a
comparatively easy matter, fraught with no far-reaching harm to the
community. The disobedience, in such a case commands the moral approval
of the civilised community, and ends only by affecting the prestige of
the promulgator of the order. But when a campaign is undertaken
involving a wholesale and general defiance of order and authority,
forces may arise, which, in the hands of inexperienced and enthusiastic
associates or partisans, may reach extreme limits, involving the
community in chaos, disorder and possibly violence. The country has had
only a year's training in his (Mr. Gandhi) counsels of non-violent
resistance--far too short a period for his countrymen to imbibe his
spirit, in a manner worthy of his teaching. May we, therefore, hope that
in launching on this undertaking he will seriously consider this aspect
of the case? We shall of course, watch his experiment but with concern
and solicitude, feeling secure in the hope, created by his magnificent
personality, that in his hands the destinies of the country are
perfectly safe.




APPENDIX VII

Extracts from the speech delivered by His Excellency Sir Harcourt
Butler, Governor of the U. P. of Agra & Oudh, at the opening of the U. P.
Legislative Council,

_Lucknow, 22nd January, 1921_


Mr. President and Members of the Legislative Council,

"Great efforts have been made to draw away young men from schools and
colleges and to induce professional men to give up their careers. Great
efforts have been made to prevent voters from going to the polls. But
these efforts have met with little success. The elections have
undoubtedly given the province a really representative legislative
council. The chief opponents of the reforms have shown by word and act
that their aim is not the ordered development of political institutions
in India but the expulsions of Western civilization from India--a course
involving the reversion to the condition of disorder, lawlessness and
internecine strife such as prevailed in the unsettled times before the
advent of British rule."

"The tenantry were widely stirred up. The criminal classes took
advantage of the occasion and serious trouble ensued in which there was
regrettable loss of life. A full report on the Rae Bareli disturbances
will be published within a few days. It was fortunately possible to
restore order without calling in military aid from outside, and for this
I have already congratulated the local authorities and others concerned.
Statements, I may say that all reports from both Rae Bareli and Fyzabad
indicate that the tenantry are actuated by no hostility to Government or
to Europeans. The agitators have endeavoured to stir up such hostility."

"As for my Government I have chosen as colleagues without favour strong
and independent men. They will have my complete confidence in all
matters, and it is my desire that we should work together as far as
possible as one Government. I shall endeavour to secure that we all,
Europeans and Indians, work together on harmonious lines as
brother-subjects of the King-Emperor; and I pray that the Reforms Scheme
which we are commencing to-day will and largely and effectively to the
well-being and happiness of this ancient land of Hindustan."




APPENDIX VIII

Extracts from the speech delivered by His Excellency Sir Harcourt Butler
at a meeting of the United Provinces Legislative Council

_28th March 1921_


Mr. President and Members of the Legislative Council,

"The recent disorder in Rae Bareli has necessitated a further
reconsideration of the question. Whereas the former disorders in Rae
Bareli were largely agrarian in origin the recent disorders were mainly
political in origin and wholly revolutionary".

"The result of the disorders has been an unfortunate loss of life, for
which the agitators are directly responsible, and a feeling of
insecurity which if unchecked may spread with untoward results,
affecting innocent and guilty alike. Confronted with an elemental
question as to the maintenance of order, my Government came unanimously
to the conclusion that it was necessary to stop the campaign of
unconstitutional agitation and lying, _propaganda_ which has been
carried on the four south-eastern districts of Outh--Rae Bareli,
Partabgarh, Sultanpur and Fyzabad. We therefore applied to the
Government of India to extend the Seditious Meetings Act to those four
districts. This has been done".

"I believe that this action will have the support of this Council and of
responsible people generally in this province. With the non-co-operators
we can have nothing to do beyond meeting their mischievous activities.
Their movement is a revolutionary movement playing on passion and
pandering to ignorance but the mass of people are loyal and all their
interests are bound up with the maintenance of order."
