Title: The State: Its History and Development Viewed Sociologically


Author: Franz Oppenheimer

Translator: John M. Gitterman




AUTHORÕS PREFACE

TO THE SECOND AMERICAN EDITION


This little book has made its way. In addition to the present
translation into English, there are authorized editions in French,
Hungarian and Serbian. I am also informed that there are translations
published in Japanese, Russian, Hebrew and Yiddish; but these, of
course, are pirated. The book has stood the test of criticism, and has
been judged both favorably and unfavorably. It has, unquestionably,
revived the discussion on the origin and essence of the State.

Several prominent ethnologists, particularly Holsti, the present
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Finnish Free State, have attacked
the basic principle formulated and demonstrated in this Work, but they
have failed, because their definition of the State assumed the very
matter that required to be proven. They have brought together a large
array of facts in proof of the existence of some forms of _Government_
and _Leadership_, even where no classes obtained, and to the substance
of these forms they have given the name of ÒThe State.Ó It is not
my intention to controvert these facts. It is self-evident, that in
any group of human beings, be it ever so small, there must exist an
authority which determines conflicts and, in extraordinary situations,
assumes the leadership. But this authority is not ÒThe State,Ó in
the sense in which I use the word. The State may be defined as an
organization of _one class_ dominating over the other classes. Such
a class organization can come about in one way only, namely, through
conquest and the subjection of ethnic groups by the dominating group.
This can be demonstrated with almost mathematical certainty. Not one of
my critics has brought proofs to invalidate this thesis. Most modern
sociologists, among whom may be named Albion Small, Alfred Vierkandt
and Wilhelm Wundt, accept this thesis. Wilhelm Wundt, in particular,
asserts in unmistakable language, that Òthe political society (a
term identical with the State in the sense employed in this book)
first came about and could originate only in the period of migration
and conquest,Ó whereby the subjugation of one people by another was
effected.

But even some of my opponents are favorably inclined to my arguments,
as in the case of the venerable Adolf Wagner, whose words I am proud
to quote. In his article on ÒThe StateÓ in the _Handwšrterbuch der
Staatswissenschaften_, he writes: ÒThe sociologic concept of the State,
to which I have referred, particularly in the broad scope and treatment
of it given by Oppenheimer, deserves careful consideration, especially
from political economists and political historians. The vista opened
out, from this point of view, of the economic development of peoples
and that of the State during historic times, should be attractive even
to the opponents of the concept itself.Ó

The Òsociologic concept of the State,Ó as Ludwig Gumplowicz termed it,
is assured of ultimate general acceptance. Its opponents are strenuous
and persevering, and I once called them Òthe sociologic root of all
evil;Ó but the concept, none the less, is the basic principle of
ÒbourgeoisieÓ sociology, and will be found of value in the study, not
only of economics and history, but in that of Law and Constitutional
History. I permit myself to make a few remarks on this point.

The earliest evidence of the recognition of the idea underlying the
_law of previous accumulation_, may be traced back, at the latest, to
the period of the decay of classical civilization, at the time when
the capitalistic slave economy brought the city states to ruin as
though their peoples had suffered from a galloping consumption. As
in our modern capitalistic age, which resembles that period in many
respects, there occurred a breach in all those naturally developed
relations in which the individual has found protection. What Ferdinand
Toennies calls the Òcommunity bondsÓ were loosened. The individual
found himself unprotected, compelled to rely on his own efforts and
on his own reason in the seething sea of competition which followed.
The collective reason, the product of the wisdom of thousands of years
of experience, could no longer guide or safeguard him. It had become
scattered. Out of this need for an individual reason, there arose the
idea of _nationalism_. This idea had its justification at first, as a
line of development and a method in the newly born science of social
government; but when later it became what Rubenstein (in his work
_Romantic Socialism_) calls a Òtendency,Ó it was not justified. The
community, to use ToenniesÕ term, changed into a Òsociety.Ó ÒContractÓ
seemed to be the only bond that held men together--the contract based
on the purely rationalistic relation of service for service, the _do
ut des_, the ÒContrat SocialÓ of Rousseau. A ÒsocietyÓ would thus
appear to be a union of self-seeking individuals who hoped through
combination to obtain their personal satisfactions. Aristotle had
taught that the State had developed, by gradual growth, from the family
group. The Stoics and Epicureans held that individuals formed the
State--with this difference, that the former viewed the individual as
being socially inclined by nature, and the latter that he was naturally
anti-social. To the Stoics, therefore, the ÒState of NatureÓ was a
peaceful union; to the Epicureans it was a war of each against the
other, with Society as a compelling means for a decent modus vivendi.
With the one a Society was conditioned ÒphyseiÓ (by nature); with the
other it was ÒnomoÓ (by decree).

In spite, however, of this fundamental difference between these
schools, both assumed the premise that, at the beginning, individuals
were _free_, _equal_ politically and economically, and that it was from
such an original social order there had developed, through gradual
differentiation, the fully developed State with its class hierarchy.
This is the _law of previous accumulation_.

But we should err if we believed that this thesis was originally
intended as a historical account. Rationalism is essentially
unhistoric, even anti-historic. On the contrary, the thesis was
originally put forward as a Òfiction,Ó a theory, a conscious
unhistorical assumption. In this form it acquired the name of _natural
law_. It was under this name that it came into modern thought,
tinctured stoically in Grotius and Puffendorf, and epicureanally in
Hobbes. It became the operative weapon of thought among the rising
third estate of the capitalists.

The capitalists used the weapon, first against the feudal state with
its privileged class, and, later against the fourth estate, with its
class theory of Socialism. Against the feudal domination it argued
that a ÒLaw of NatureÓ knows and permits no privileges. After its
victories in the English Revolution of 1648, and the great French
Revolution of 1789, it justified, by the same reasoning, its own _de
facto_ pre-eminence, its own social and economic class superiority,
against the claims of the working classes. According to Adam Smith, the
classes in a society are the results of ÒnaturalÓ development. From an
original state of equality, these arose from no other cause than the
exercise of the economic virtues of industry, frugality and providence.
Since these virtues are pre-eminently those of a bourgeoisie society,
the capitalist rule, thus sanctioned by natural law, is just and
unassailable. As a corollary to this theorem the claims of Socialism
cannot be admitted.

Thus, what originally was put forward as a Òfiction,Ó became first, a
hypothesis and finally the _axiom_ of all bourgeoisie sociology. Those
who support it accept the axiom as self-evident, as not requiring
proof. For them, class domination, on this theory, is the result of a
gradual differentiation from an original state of general equality and
freedom, with no implication in it of any extra-economic power. Robert
Malthus applied this alleged law to the future, in his attempt to
demonstrate any kind of Socialism to be purely Utopian. His celebrated
_Law of Population_ is nothing but the _law of original accumulation_
projected into the future. He claims that if any attempt were made to
restore the state of economic equality, the workings of the law would
have the effect--because of the difference in economic efficiency--of
restoring modern class conditions. All orthodox sociology begins
with the struggle against this supposed law of class formations. Yet
every step of progress made in the various fields of the science of
sociology, has been made by tearing up, one by one, the innumerable and
far-spreading roots which have proceeded from this supposed axiom. A
sound sociology has to recall the fact that class formation in historic
times, did not take place through gradual differentiation in pacific
economic competition, but was the result of violent conquest and
subjugation.

As both Capitalism and Socialism had their origins in England,
these new ideas were certain to find their first expression in that
country. So that we find Gerrard Winstanley, the leader of the Òtrue
levellersÓ of CromwellÕs time, arraying the facts of history against
this anti-historical theoretical assumption. He showed that the
English ruling class (the Squirearchy) was composed essentially of the
victorious conquerors, the Normans, and that the subject class were the
conquered English Saxons. But his demonstration had little influence.
It was only when the great French Revolution brought the contrast out
sharply that the thought sunk in. No less a person than Count St.
Simon, acknowledged as the founder of the science of modern sociology,
and the no less scientific Socialism, discovered in the dominant class
of his country the Frankish and Burgundian conquerors, and in its
subject population, the descendants of the Romanized Celts. It was
the publication of this discovery that gave birth to Western European
sociology. The conclusions drawn from it were carried further by St.
SimonÕs disciple, August Comte, in his _Philosophy of History_, and
by the Saint Simonists, Enfantin and Bazard. These thinkers had great
influence on the economic development of the next century; but their
chief contribution was the elaboration of the sociologic idea of the
State.

Among the peoples of Western Europe, the new sociology found a readier
acceptance than it did among those of Eastern Europe. The reason for
this can easily be seen when it is remembered that in the East the
contrast between the ÒStateÓ and ÒSociety,Ó had not been so definitely
realized, as it had been in the West. Even in the West, this contrast
was only fully appreciated, as a social fact, in England, France, the
Netherlands and Italy, because in these countries only the class of
mobile wealth which had worked its way up as the third estate, had
succeeded in ousting the feudal ÒState.Ó In France, the league of the
capitalists with the Crown against the then armed and active nobility
had succeeded in subjecting the Frondeurs under the absolute power of
the King. From this time on, this new estate represented itself as
the Nation, and the term ÒNational EconomyÓ takes the place of the
older term ÒPolitical Economy.Ó The members of this third estate felt
themselves to be those subjects of the State whose rights and liberties
had been curtailed by the privileges of the two dominant estates of
the nobility and the clergy. Henceforth, the Third Estate proclaims
the rights of ÒSocietyÓ and against the ÒState,Ó opposes the eternal
Law of Nature--that of original equality and freedom--against the
theoretic-historical rights of the Estates. The concept of Society as a
contrast to the concept of the State, first appears in Locke, and from
his time on this contrast was more and more defined, especially in the
writings of the physiocrat school of economists.

In this struggle between classes and ideas, neither Middle nor Eastern
Europe played any important part. In Germany there had once developed
a Capitalist class (in the period of the Fuggers of Augsburg) which
attained to almost American magnitude. But it was crushed by the
Religious Wars and the various French invasions of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, which left Germany a devastated, depopulated
desert. At the end of the period there remained a few cities and small
states under the absolute domination of princes. Within the cities
the artisans were bound together in their craft-leagues, and the rest
consisted of those of educational pursuits and academic officials. In
a large degree all these were dependent on the State--the members of
the craft-guilds because they accepted a privileged condition, the
officials because they were servants of the State, and the professional
men, because they belonged to the upper estate of the society. For this
reason there was no economic or social movement of the third estate in
Germany; there was only a literary movement influenced by the flow of
ideas from the West. This explains why the contrast between the two
ideas of the State and of Society was not present in the minds of the
German people. On the contrary, the two terms were used as synonyms,
both connotating an essentially necessary conformity to nature.

But there is still another cause for this difference in the mental
attitude between Western and Eastern Europe. In England and France,
from the time of Descartes, the problems and inquiries of science
were set by men trained in mathematics and the natural sciences.
Especially in the new study of the philosophy of history, the beginning
of our modern sociology, did these men act as guides. In Germany, on
the contrary, it was the theologians and especially the Protestant
theologians who were the leaders of thought. In their hands the State
came to be looked upon as an instrument of Divine fashioning, and,
indeed, of immanent divinity. This thought resulted in a worship of
the State, which reached its height in the well-known Hegelian system.
It thus happened that two rivers of thought flowed for a time side by
side--the Sociology of Western Europe, and the philosophy of History of
Germany--with occasional intercommunicating streams, such as Althusios
and Puffendorf into the French, English and Dutch teaching of natural
law, and that of Rousseau into Hegel. In 1840, however, a direct
junction was effected through Lorenz Stein, one of HegelÕs most gifted
pupils who, later, became the leading German teacher of administrative
law, and influenced generations of thinkers. He came to Paris, as a
young man, for the purpose of studying Socialism at the fountain head.
He became acquainted with the celebrated men of that heroic time--with
Enfintin and Bazard, with Louis Blanc, Reybaud, and Proudhon.

Lorenz Stein absorbed the new thought with enthusiasm, and in his
fertile mind there was precipitated the creative synthesis between the
Western Europe scientific sociological thought and the metaphysical
German philosophy of history. The product was called by him the Science
of Society (_Gesellschaftswissenschaft_). It is from the writings of
Stein that almost all the important developments of German sociologic
thought received their first impulses. Karl Marx, especially (as Struve
has shown), as well as Schaeffle, Othmar Spann and Gumplowicz are
largely indebted to him.

It is not my purpose to develop this historical theme. I am concerned
only in tracing the development of the sociologic idea of the State.
The first effect of this meeting of the two streams of thought was a
mischievous confusion of terminology. The writers in Western Europe had
long ago lost control of the unification of expressions in thinking.
As stated above, the Third Estate began by thinking itself to be
ÒSociety,Ó as opposed to the State. But when the Fourth Estate grew to
class consciousness and became aware of its own theoretic existence,
it arrogated to itself the term ÒSocietyÓ (as may be seen from the
selection of the word Socialism), and it treated the Bourgeoisie as a
form of the ÒState,Ó of the class state. There were thus two widely
differing concepts of ÒSociety.Ó Yet here was an underlying idea common
to both Bourgeoisie and Socialist, since they conceived the State as
a collection of privileges arising and maintained _in violation_ of
natural law, while Society was thought of as the prescribed form of
human union in _conformity_ with natural law. They differed in one
essential only, namely, that while the Third Estate declared its
capitalistic Society to be the result of the processes of natural law,
the Socialists regarded their aims as not yet attained, and proclaimed
that the ideal society of the future which would really be the product
of the processes of natural law, could only be realized by the
elimination of all Òsurplus value.Ó Though both were in conflict with
regard to fundamentals, both agreed in viewing the ÒStateÓ as _civitas
diaboli_ and ÒSocietyÓ as _civitas dei_.

Stein, however, reversed the objectives of the two concepts. As an
Hegelian, and pre-eminently a worshipper of the State, he conceived the
State as _civitas coelestis_. Society, which he understood to mean only
the dominant bourgeoisie Society, he viewed through the eyes of his
Socialist friends and teachers, and conceived it as _civitas terrena_.

What in PlatoÕs sense is the Òpure idea,Ó the Òordre naturelÓ of the
early physiocrats and termed by Frenchmen and Englishmen ÒSociety,Ó
was to Stein, the ÒState.Ó What had been contaminated and made impure
by the admixture of coarse matter, they termed the ÒState,Ó while
the German called it ÒSociety.Ó In reality, however, there is little
difference between the two. Stein realized with pain, that HegelÕs pure
concept of a State based on right and freedom, was bound to remain
an ÒideaÓ only. Eternally fettered, as he assumed it must be, by the
forces of property and the culture proceeding from them, it could never
be a fact. This is his conclusion regarding ÒSociety,Ó so that its
effective development is obstructed by the beneficent association of
human beings, as Stein conceived that association.

Thus was attained the very pinnacle of confused thinking. All German
sociologists, with the single exception of Carl Dietzel, soon realized
that the Hegelian concept of the State was impotent, existing only in
the ÒIdea.Ó In no point did it touch the reality of historical growth,
and in no sense could it be made to stand for what had always been
considered as the State. Long ago both Marx and Bakunin--respectively
the founders of scientific collectivism and practical anarchism--and
especially Ludwig Gumplowicz, abandoned the Hegelian terminology and
accepted that of Western Europe and this has been generally accepted
everywhere.

In this little book I have followed the Western European terminology.
By the ÒState,Ó I do not mean the human aggregation which may perchance
_come about to be_, or, as it properly _should be_. I mean by it
that summation of privileges and dominating positions which are
brought into being by extra-economic power. And in contrast to this,
I mean by Society, the totality of concepts of all purely natural
relations and institutions between man and man, which will not be
fully realized until the last remnant of the creations of the barbaric
Òages of conquest and migration,Ó has been eliminated from community
life. Others may call any form of leadership and government or some
other ideal, the ÒState.Ó That is a matter of personal choice. It is
useless to quarrel about definitions. But it might be well if those
other thinkers were to understand that they have not controverted the
sociologic idea of the ÒState,Ó if a concept of the ÒStateÓ grounded on
a different basis, does not correspond to that which they have evolved.
And they must guard themselves particularly against the danger of
applying any definition other than that used in this book to those
actual historical products which have hitherto been called ÒStates,Ó
the essence, development, course and future of which must be explained
by any true teaching or philosophy of the State.

            FRANZ OPPENHEIMER.

  Frankfort-on-Main, April 1922.






