

CHAPTER I

THEORIES OF THE STATE


This treatise regards the State from the sociological standpoint only,
not from the juristic--sociology, as I understand the word, being both
a philosophy of history and a theory of economics. Our object is to
trace the development of the State from its socio-psychological genesis
up to its modern constitutional form; after that, we shall endeavor to
present a well-founded prognosis concerning its future development.
Since we shall trace only the StateÕs inner, essential being, we need
not concern ourselves with the external forms of law under which its
international and intra-national life is assumed. This treatise, in
short, is a contribution to the philosophy of State development; but
only in so far as the law of development here traced from its generic
form affects also the social problems common to all forms of the modern
State.

With this limitation of treatment in mind, we may at the outset dismiss
all received doctrines of public law. Even a cursory examination of
conventional theories of the State is sufficient to show that they
furnish no explanation of its genesis, essence and purpose. These
theories represent all possible shadings between all imaginable
extremes. Rousseau derives the State from a social contract, while
Carey ascribes its origin to a band of robbers. Plato and the followers
of Karl Marx endow the State with omnipotence, making it the absolute
lord over the citizen in all political and economic matters; while
Plato even goes so far as to wish the State to regulate sexual
relations. The Manchester school, on the other hand, going to the
opposite extreme of liberalism, would have the State exercise only
needful police functions, and would thus logically have as a result
a scientific anarchism which must utterly exterminate the State.
From these various and conflicting views, it is impossible either to
establish a fixed principle, or to formulate a satisfactory concept of
the real essence of the State.

This irreconcilable conflict of theories is easily explained by the
fact that none of the conventional theories treats the State from the
sociological view-point. Nevertheless, the State is a phenomenon common
to all history, and its essential nature can only be made plain by a
broad and comprehensive study of universal history. Except in the field
of sociology, the kingÕs highway of science, no treatment of the State
has heretofore taken this path. All previous theories of the State
have been class theories. To anticipate somewhat the outcome of our
researches, every State has been and is a class State, and every theory
of the State has been and is a class theory.

A class theory is, however, of necessity, not the result of
investigation and reason, but a by-product of desires and will. Its
arguments are used, not to establish truth, but as weapons in the
contest for material interests. The result, therefore, is not science,
but nescience. By understanding the State, we may indeed recognize the
essence of theories concerning the State. But the converse is not true.
An understanding of theories about the State will give us no clue to
its essence.

The following may be stated as a ruling concept, especially prevalent
in university teaching, of the origin and essence of the State. It
represents a view which, in spite of manifold attacks, is still
affirmed.

It is maintained that the State is an organization of human community
life, which originates by reason of a social instinct implanted in men
by nature (Stoic Doctrine); or else is brought about by an irresistible
impulse to end the Òwar of all against all,Ó and to coerce the savage,
who opposes organized effort, to a peaceable community life in place
of the anti-social struggle in which all budding shoots of advancement
are destroyed (Epicurean Doctrine). These two apparently irreconcilable
concepts were fused by the intermediation of medi¾val philosophy.
This, founded on theologic reasoning and belief in the Bible, developed
the opinion that man, originally and by nature a social creature, is,
through original sin, the fratricide of Cain and the transgression at
the tower of Babel, divided into innumerable tribes, which fight to the
hilt, until they unite peaceably as a State.

This view is utterly untenable. It confuses the logical concept of a
class with some subordinate species thereof. Granted that the State is
_one_ form of organized political cohesion, it is also to be remembered
that it is a form having _specific_ characteristics. Every state in
history was or is a _state of classes_, a polity of superior and
inferior social groups, based upon distinctions either of rank or of
property. This phenomenon must, then, be called the ÒState.Ó With it
alone history occupies itself.

We should, therefore, be justified in designating every other
form of political organization by the same term, without further
differentiation, had there never existed any other than a class-state,
or were it the only conceivable form. At least, proof might properly
be called for, to show that each conceivable political organization,
even though originally it did not represent a polity of superior and
inferior social and economic classes, since it is of necessity subject
to inherent laws of development, must in the end be resolved into the
specific class form of history. Were such proof forthcoming, it would
offer in fact only one form of political amalgamation, calling in
turn for differentiation at various stages of development, viz., the
preparatory stage, when class distinction does not exist, and the stage
of maturity, when it is fully developed.

Former students of the philosophy of the State were dimly aware of this
problem. And they tried to adduce the required proof, that because of
inherent tendencies of development, every human political organization
must gradually become a class-state. Philosophers of the canon law
handed this theory down to philosophers of the law of nature. From
these, through the mediation of Rousseau, it became a part of the
teachings of the economists; and even to this day it rules their views
and diverts them from the facts.

This assumed proof is based upon the concept of a Òprimitive
accumulation,Ó or an original store of wealth, in lands and in movable
property, brought about by means of purely economic forces; a doctrine
justly derided by Karl Marx as a Òfairy tale.Ó Its scheme of reasoning
approximates this:

Somewhere, in some far-stretching, fertile country, a number of free
men, of equal status, form a union for mutual protection. Gradually
they differentiate into property classes. Those best endowed with
strength, wisdom, capacity for saving, industry and caution, slowly
acquire a basic amount of real or movable property; while the stupid
and less efficient, and those given to carelessness and waste, remain
without possessions. The well-to-do lend their productive property to
the less well-off in return for tribute, either ground rent or profit,
and become thereby continually richer, while the others always remain
poor. These differences in possession gradually develop social class
distinctions; since everywhere the rich have preference, while they
alone have the time and the means to devote to public affairs and
to turn the laws administered by them to their own advantage. Thus,
in time, there develops a ruling and property-owning estate, and a
proletariate, a class without property. The primitive state of free and
equal fellows becomes a class-state, by an inherent law of development,
because in every conceivable mass of men there are, as may readily be
seen, strong and weak, clever and foolish, cautious and wasteful ones.

This seems quite plausible, and it coincides with the experience of our
daily life. It is not at all unusual to see an especially gifted member
of the lower class rise from his former surroundings, and even attain
a leading position in the upper class; or conversely, to see some
spendthrift or weaker member of the higher group Òlose his classÓ and
drop into the proletariate.

And yet this entire theory is utterly mistaken; it is a Òfairy tale,Ó
or it is a class theory used to justify the privileges of the upper
classes. The class-state never originated in this fashion, and never
could have so originated. History shows that it did not; and economics
shows deductively, with a testimony absolute, mathematical and binding,
that it could not. A simple problem in elementary arithmetic shows that
the assumption of an original accumulation is totally erroneous, and
has nothing to do with the development of the class-state.

The proof is as follows: All teachers of natural law, etc., have
unanimously declared that the differentiation into income-receiving
classes and propertyless classes can only take place when all fertile
lands have been occupied. For so long as man has ample opportunity
to take up unoccupied land, Òno one,Ó says Turgot, Òwould think of
entering the service of another;Ó we may add, Òat least for wages,
which are not apt to be higher than the earnings of an independent
peasant working an unmortgaged and sufficiently large property;Ó while
mortgaging is not possible as long as land is yet free for the working
or taking, as free as air and water. Matter that is obtainable for the
taking has no value that enables it to be pledged, since no one loans
on things that can be had for nothing.

The philosophers of natural law, then, assumed that complete occupancy
of the ground must have occurred quite early, because of the natural
increase of an originally small population. They were under the
impression that at their time, in the eighteenth century, it had taken
place many centuries previous, and they na•vely deduced the existing
class aggroupment from the assumed conditions of that long-past point
of time. It never entered their heads to work out their problem; and
with few exceptions their error has been copied by sociologists,
historians and economists. It is only quite recently that my figures
were worked out, and they are truly astounding.[A]

[A] Franz Oppenheimer, _Theorie der Reinen und Politischen Îkonomie_.
Berlin, 1912.--_Translator._

We can determine with approximate accuracy the amount of land of
average fertility in the temperate zone, and also what amount is
sufficient to enable a family of peasants to exist comfortably, or
how much such a family can work with its own forces, without engaging
outside help or permanent farm servants. At the time of the migration
of the barbarians (350 to 750 A.ÊD.), the lot of each able-bodied man
was about thirty morgen (equal to twenty acres) on average lands, on
very good ground only ten to fifteen morgen (equal to seven or ten
acres), four morgen being equal to one hectare. Of this land, at least
a third, and sometimes a half, was left uncultivated each year. The
remainder of the fifteen to twenty morgen sufficed to feed and fatten
into giants the immense families of these child-producing Germans, and
this in spite of the primitive technique, whereby at least half the
productive capacity of a day was lost. Let us assume that, in these
modern times, thirty morgen (equal to twenty acres) for the average
peasant suffices to support a family. We have then assumed a block
of land sufficiently large to meet any objection. Modern Germany,
populated as it is, contains an agricultural area of thirty-four
million hectares (equal to eighty-four million, fifteen thousand, four
hundred and eighty acres). The agricultural population, including
farm laborers and their families, amounts to seventeen million; so
that, assuming five persons to a family and an equal division of the
farm lands, each family would have ten hectares (equal to twenty-five
acres). In other words, not even in the Germany of our own day would
the point have been reached where, according to the theories of the
adherents of natural law, differentiation into classes would begin.

Apply the same process to countries less densely settled, such, for
example, as the Danube States, Turkey, Hungary and Russia, and still
more astounding results will appear. As a matter of fact, there are
still on the earthÕs surface, seventy-three billion, two hundred
million hectares (equal to one hundred eighty billion, eight hundred
eighty million and four hundred sixteen thousand acres); dividing
into the first amount the number of human beings of all professions
whatever, viz., one billion, eight hundred million, every family of
five persons could possess about thirty morgen (equal to eighteen
and a half acres), _and still leave about two-thirds of the planet
unoccupied_.

If, therefore, purely economic causes are ever to bring about a
differentiation into classes by the growth of a propertyless laboring
class, the time has not yet arrived; and the critical point at which
ownership of land will cause a natural scarcity is thrust into the dim
future--if indeed it ever can arrive.

As a matter of fact, however, for centuries past, in all parts of the
world, we have had a class-state, with possessing classes on top and
a propertyless laboring class at the bottom, even when population was
much less dense than it is to-day. Now it is true that the class-state
can arise only where all fertile acreage has been _occupied_
completely; and since I have shown that even at the present time, all
the ground is not occupied economically, this must mean that it has
been pre‘mpted politically. Since land could not have acquired Ònatural
scarcity,Ó the scarcity must have been Òlegal.Ó This means that the
land has been pre‘mpted by a ruling class against its subject class,
and settlement prevented. Therefore the State, as a class-state, can
have originated in no other way than through conquest and subjugation.

This view, the so-called Òsociologic idea of the state,Ó as the
following will show, is supported in ample manner by well-known
historical facts. And yet most modern historians have rejected it,
holding that both groups, amalgamated by war into one State, before
that time had, each for itself formed a ÒState.Ó As there is no method
of obtaining historical proof to the contrary, since the beginnings
of human history are unknown, we should arrive at a verdict of Ònot
proven,Ó were it not that, deductively, there is the absolute certainty
that the State, as history shows it, the class-state, could not have
come about except through warlike subjugation. The mass of evidence
shows that our simple calculation excludes any other result.


THE SOCIOLOGICAL IDEA OF THE STATE

To the originally, purely sociological, idea of the State, I have added
the economic phase and formulated it as follows:

What, then, is the State as a sociological concept? The State,
completely in its genesis, essentially and almost completely during the
first stages of its existence, is a social institution, forced by a
victorious group of men on a defeated group, with the sole purpose of
regulating the dominion of the victorious group over the vanquished,
and securing itself against revolt from within and attacks from abroad.
Teleologically, this dominion had no other purpose than the economic
exploitation of the vanquished by the victors.

No primitive state known to history originated in any other manner.[1]
Wherever a reliable tradition reports otherwise, either it concerns
the amalgamation of two fully developed primitive states into one body
of more complete organization; or else it is an adaptation to men of
the fable of the sheep which made a bear their king in order to be
protected against the wolf. But even in this latter case, the form and
content of the State became precisely the same as in those states where
nothing intervened, and which became immediately Òwolf states.Ó

The little history learned in our school-days suffices to prove this
generic doctrine. Everywhere we find some warlike tribe of wild men
breaking through the boundaries of some less warlike people, settling
down as nobility and founding its State. In Mesopotamia, wave follows
wave, state follows state--Babylonians, Amoritans, Assyrians, Arabs,
Medes, Persians, Macedonians, Parthians, Mongols, Seldshuks, Tartars,
Turks; on the Nile, Hyksos, Nubians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Arabs,
Turks; in Greece, the Doric States are typical examples; in Italy,
Romans, Ostrogoths, Lombards, Franks, Germans; in Spain, Carthaginians,
Visigoths, Arabs; in Gaul, Romans, Franks, Burgundians, Normans; in
Britain, Saxons, Normans. In India wave upon wave of wild warlike
clans has flooded over the country even to the islands of the Indian
Ocean. So also is it with China. In the European colonies, we find
the selfsame type, wherever a settled element of the population has
been found, as for example, in South America and Mexico. Where that
element is lacking, where only roving huntsmen are found, who may be
exterminated but not subjugated, the conquerors resort to the device
of importing from afar masses of men to be exploited, to be subject
perpetually to forced labor, and thus the slave trade arises.

An apparent exception is found only in those European colonies in
which it is forbidden to replace the lack of a domiciled indigenous
population by the importation of slaves. One of these colonies, the
United States of America, is among the most powerful state-formations
in all history. The exception there found is to be explained by this,
that the mass of men to be exploited and worked without cessation
_imports itself_, by emigration in great hordes from primitive states
or from those in higher stages of development in which exploitation has
become unbearable, while liberty of movement has been attained. In this
case, one may speak of an infection from afar with ÒstatehoodÓ brought
in by the infected of foreign lands. Where, however, in such colonies,
immigration is very limited, either because of excessive distances
and the consequent high charges for moving from home, or because of
regulations limiting the immigration, we perceive an approximation
to the final end of the development of the State, which we nowadays
recognize as the necessary outcome and finale, but for which we have
not yet found a scientific terminology. Here again, in the dialectic
development, a change in the quantity is bound up with a change of
the quality. The old form is filled with new contents. We still find
a ÒStateÓ in so far as it represents the tense regulation, secured by
external force, whereby is secured the social living together of large
bodies of men; but it is no longer the ÒStateÓ in its older sense.
It is no longer the instrument of political domination and economic
exploitation of one social group by another; it is no longer a ÒState
of Classes.Ó It rather resembles a condition which appears to have
come about through a Òsocial contract.Ó This stage is approached by
the Australian Colonies, excepting Queensland, which after the feudal
manner still exploits the half enslaved Kanakas. It is almost attained
in New Zealand.

So long as there is no general assent as to the origin and essence of
states historically known or as to the sociological meaning of the word
ÒState,Ó it would be futile to attempt to force into use a new name
for these most advanced commonwealths. They will continue to be called
ÒstatesÓ in spite of all protests, especially because of the pleasure
of using confusing concepts. For the purpose of this study, however, we
propose to employ a new concept, a different verbal lever, and shall
speak of the result of the new process as a ÒFreemenÕs Citizenship.Ó

This summary survey of the states of the past and present should, if
space permitted, be supplemented by an examination of the facts offered
by the study of races, and of those states which are not treated in our
falsely called ÒUniversal History.Ó On this point, the assurance may be
accepted that here again our general rule is valid without exception.
Everywhere, whether in the Malay Archipelago, or in the Ògreat
sociological laboratory of Africa,Ó at all places on this planet where
the development of tribes has at all attained a higher form, the State
grew from the subjugation of one group of men by another. Its basic
justification, its raison dÕtre, was and is the economic exploitation
of those subjugated.

The summary review thus far made may serve as proof of the basic
premise of this sketch. The pathfinder, to whom, before all others,
we are indebted for this line of investigation is Professor Ludwig
Gumplowicz of Graz, jurist and sociologist, who crowned a brave life
by a brave self-chosen death. We can, then, in sharp outlines, follow
in the sufferings of humanity the path which the State has pursued in
its progress through the ages. This we propose now to trace from the
primitive state founded on conquest to the ÒfreemenÕs citizenship.Ó


