What can we do for the world while we live?Many men and women would wish to serve mankind, but they are perplexedand their power seems infinitesimal. Despair seizes them; those whohave the strongest passion suffer most from the sense of impotence, andare most liable to spiritual ruin through lack of hope.So long as we think only of the immediate future, it seems that whatwe can do is not much. It is probably impossible for us to bring thewar to an end. We cannot destroy the excessive power of the State orof private property. We cannot, here and now, bring new life intoeducation. In such matters, though we may see the evil, we cannotquickly cure it by any of the ordinary methods of politics. We mustrecognize that the world is ruled in a wrong spirit, and that a changeof spirit will not come from one day to the next. Our expectationsmust not be for to-morrow, but for the time when what is thought now bya few shall have become the common thought of many. If we have courageand patience, we can think the thoughts and feel the hopes by which,sooner or later, men will be inspired, and weariness and discouragementwill be turned into energy and ardor. For this reason, the first thingwe have to do is to be clear in our own minds as to the kind of life wethink good and the kind of change that we desire in the world.The ultimate power of those whose thought is vital is far greater thanit seems to men who suffer from the irrationality of contemporarypolitics. Religious toleration was once the solitary speculation of afew bold philosophers. Democracy, as a theory, arose among a handful ofmen in Cromwell’s army; by them, after the Restoration, it was carriedto America, where it came to fruition in the War of Independence. FromAmerica, Lafayette and the other Frenchmen who fought by the side ofWashington brought the theory of democracy to France, where it uniteditself with the teaching of Rousseau and inspired the Revolution.Socialism, whatever we may think of its merits, is a great and growingpower, which is transforming economic and political life; and socialismowes its origin to a very small number of isolated theorists. Themovement against the subjection of women, which has become irresistibleand is not far from complete triumph, began in the same way with a fewimpracticable idealists—Mary Wollstonecraft, Shelley, John Stuart Mill.The power of thought, in the long run, is greater than any other humanpower. Those who have the ability to think and the imagination to thinkin accordance with men’s needs, are likely to achieve the good they aimat sooner or later, though probably not while they are still alive.But those who wish to gain the world by thought must be content tolose it as a support in the present. Most men go through life withoutmuch questioning, accepting the beliefs and practices which they findcurrent, feeling that the world will be their ally if they do notput themselves in opposition to it. New thought about the world isincompatible with this comfortable acquiescence; it requires a certainintellectual detachment, a certain solitary energy, a power of inwardlydominating the world and the outlook that the world engenders. Withoutsome willingness to be lonely new thought cannot be achieved. And itwill not be achieved to any purpose if the loneliness is accompaniedby aloofness, so that the wish for union with others dies, or ifintellectual detachment leads to contempt. It is because the stateof mind required is subtle and difficult, because it is hard to beintellectually detached yet not aloof, that fruitful thought on humanaffairs is not common, and that most theorists are either conventionalor sterile. The right kind of thought is rare and difficult, but it isnot impotent. It is not the fear of impotence that need turn us asidefrom thought if we have the wish to bring new hope into the world.In seeking a political theory which is to be useful at any givenmoment, what is wanted is not the invention of a Utopia, but thediscovery of the best direction of movement. The direction which isgood at one time may be superficially very different from that whichis good at another time. Useful thought is that which indicates theright direction for the present time. But in judging what is the rightdirection there are two general principles which are always applicable.1. The growth and vitality of individuals and communities is to bepromoted as far as possible.2. The growth of one individual or one community is to be as little aspossible at the expense of another.The second of these principles, as applied by an individual in hisdealings with others, is the principle of _reverence_, that the lifeof another has the same importance which we feel in our own life. Asapplied impersonally in politics, it is the principle of _liberty_,or rather it includes the principle of liberty as a part. Liberty initself is a negative principle; it tells us not to interfere, but doesnot give any basis for construction. It shows that many political andsocial institutions are bad and ought to be swept away, but it does notshow what ought to be put in their place. For this reason a furtherprinciple is required, if our political theory is not to be purelydestructive.The combination of our two principles is not in practice an easymatter. Much of the vital energy of the world runs into channels whichare oppressive. The Germans have shown themselves extraordinarily fullof vital energy, but unfortunately in a form which seems incompatiblewith the vitality of their neighbors. Europe in general has more vitalenergy than Africa, but it has used its energy to drain Africa, throughindustrialism, of even such life as the negroes possessed. The vitalityof southeastern Europe is being drained to supply cheap labor for theenterprise of American millionaires. The vitality of men has been inthe past a hindrance to the development of women, and it is possiblethat in the near future women may become a similar hindrance to men.For such reasons the principle of reverence, though not in itselfsufficient, is of very great importance, and is able to indicate manyof the political changes that the world requires.In order that both principles may be capable of being satisfied, whatis needed is a unifying or integration, first of our individual lives,then of the life of the community and of the world, without sacrificeof individuality. The life of an individual, the life of a community,and even the life of mankind, ought to be, not a number of separatefragments but in some sense a whole. When this is the case, the growthof the individual is fostered, and is not incompatible with the growthof other individuals. In this way the two principles are brought intoharmony.What integrates an individual life is a consistent creative purpose orunconscious direction. Instinct alone will not suffice to give unityto the life of a civilized man or woman: there must be some dominantobject, an ambition, a desire for scientific or artistic creation, areligious principle, or strong and lasting affections. Unity of life isvery difficult for a man or woman who has suffered a certain kind ofdefeat, the kind by which what should have been the dominant impulseis checked and made abortive. Most professions inflict this kind ofdefeat upon a man at the very outset. If a man becomes a journalist, heprobably has to write for a newspaper whose politics he dislikes; thiskills his pride in work and his sense of independence. Most medicalmen find it very hard to succeed without humbug, by which whateverscientific conscience they may have had is destroyed. Politicians areobliged, not only to swallow the party program but to pretend to besaints, in order to conciliate religious supporters; hardly any mancan enter Parliament without hypocrisy. In no profession is there anyrespect for the native pride without which a man cannot remain whole;the world ruthlessly crushes it out, because it implies independence,and men desire to enslave others more than they desire to be freethemselves. Inward freedom is infinitely precious, and a society whichwill preserve it is immeasurably to be desired.The principle of growth in a man is not crushed necessarily bypreventing him from doing some definite thing, but it is often crushedby persuading him to do something else. The things that crush growthare those that produce a sense of impotence in the directions in whichthe vital impulse wishes to be effective. The worst things are those towhich the will assents. Often, chiefly from failure of self-knowledge,a man’s will is on a lower level than his impulse: his impulse istowards some kind of creation, while his will is towards a conventionalcareer, with a sufficient income and the respect of his contemporaries.The stereotyped illustration is the artist who produces shoddy workto please the public. But something of the artist’s definiteness ofimpulse exists in very many men who are not artists. Because theimpulse is deep and dumb, because what is called common sense is oftenagainst it, because a young man can only follow it if he is willing toset up his own obscure feelings against the wisdom and prudent maximsof elders and friends, it happens in ninety-nine cases out of a hundredthat the creative impulse, out of which a free and vigorous life mighthave sprung, is checked and thwarted at the very outset: the young manconsents to become a tool, not an independent workman; a mere meansto the fulfilment of others, not the artificer of what his own naturefeels to be good. In the moment when he makes this act of consentsomething dies within him. He can never again become a whole man,never again have the undamaged self-respect, the upright pride, whichmight have kept him happy in his soul in spite of all outward troublesand difficulties—except, indeed, through conversion and a fundamentalchange in his way of life.Outward prohibitions, to which the will gives no assent, are farless harmful than the subtler inducements which seduce the will. Aserious disappointment in love may cause the most poignant pain, butto a vigorous man it will not do the same inward damage as is done bymarrying for money. The achievement of this or that special desire isnot what is essential: what is essential is the direction, the _kind_of effectiveness which is sought. When the fundamental impulse isopposed by will, it is made to feel helpless: it has no longer enoughhope to be powerful as a motive. Outward compulsion does not do thesame damage unless it produces the same sense of impotence; and it willnot produce the same sense of impotence if the impulse is strong andcourageous. Some thwarting of special desires is unavoidable even inthe best imaginable community, since some men’s desires, unchecked,lead to the oppression or destruction of others. In a good communityNapoleon could not have been allowed the profession of his choice, buthe might have found happiness as a pioneer in Western America. He couldnot have found happiness as a City clerk, and no tolerable organizationof society would compel him to become a City clerk.The integration of an individual life requires that it should embodywhatever creative impulse a man may possess, and that his educationshould have been such as to elicit and fortify this impulse. Theintegration of a community requires that the different creativeimpulses of different men and women should work together towards somecommon life, some common purpose, not necessarily conscious, in whichall the members of the community find a help to their individualfulfilment. Most of the activities that spring from vital impulsesconsist of two parts: one creative, which furthers one’s own life andthat of others with the same kind of impulse or circumstances, andone possessive, which hinders the life of some group with a differentkind of impulse or circumstances. For this reason, much of what is initself most vital may nevertheless work against life, as, for example,seventeenth-century Puritanism did in England, or as nationalismdoes throughout Europe at the present day. Vitality easily leads tostrife or oppression, and so to loss of vitality. War, at its outset,integrates the life of a nation, but it disintegrates the life of theworld, and in the long run the life of a nation too, when it is assevere as the present war.The war has made it clear that it is impossible to produce a secureintegration of the life of a single community while the relationsbetween civilized countries are governed by aggressiveness andsuspicion. For this reason any really powerful movement of reformwill have to be international. A merely national movement is sure tofail through fear of danger from without. Those who desire a betterworld, or even a radical improvement in their own country, will haveto coöperate with those who have similar desires in other countries,and to devote much of their energy to overcoming that blind hostilitywhich the war has intensified. It is not in partial integrations,such as patriotism alone can produce, that any ultimate hope is to befound. The problem is, in national and international questions as inthe individual life, to keep what is creative in vital impulses, and atthe same time to turn into other channels the part which is at presentdestructive.Men’s impulses and desires may be divided into those that are creativeand those that are possessive. Some of our activities are directed tocreating what would not otherwise exist, others are directed towardsacquiring or retaining what exists already. The typical creativeimpulse is that of the artist; the typical possessive impulse isthat of property. The best life is that in which creative impulsesplay the largest part and possessive impulses the smallest. The bestinstitutions are those which produce the greatest possible creativenessand the least possessiveness compatible with self-preservation.Possessiveness may be defensive or aggressive: in the criminal law itis defensive, and in criminals it is aggressive. It may perhaps beadmitted that the criminal law is less abominable than the criminal,and that defensive possessiveness is unavoidable so long as aggressivepossessiveness exists. But not even the most purely defensive forms ofpossessiveness are in themselves admirable; indeed, as soon as they arestrong they become hostile to the creative impulses. “Take no thought,saying, What shall we eat? or What shall we drink, or Wherewithalshall we be clothed?” Whoever has known a strong creative impulse hasknown the value of this precept in its exact and literal sense: it ispreoccupation with possessions, more than anything else, that preventsmen from living freely and nobly. The State and Property are the greatembodiments of possessiveness; it is for this reason that they areagainst life, and that they issue in war. Possession means taking orkeeping some good thing which another is prevented from enjoying;creation means putting into the world a good thing which otherwiseno one would be able to enjoy. Since the material goods of the worldmust be divided among the population, and since some men are by naturebrigands, there must be defensive possession, which will be regulated,in a good community, by some principle of impersonal justice. But allthis is only the preface to a good life or good political institutions,in which creation will altogether outweigh possession, and distributivejustice will exist as an uninteresting matter of course.The supreme principle, both in politics and in private life, shouldbe _to promote all that is creative, and so to diminish the impulsesand desires that center round possession_. The State at present isvery largely an embodiment of possessive impulses: internally, itprotects the rich against the poor; externally, it uses force for theexploitation of inferior races, and for competition with other States.Our whole economic system is concerned exclusively with possession; yetthe production of goods is a form of creation, and except in so far asit is irredeemably mechanical and monotonous, it might afford a vehiclefor creative impulses. A great deal might be achieved towards thisend by forming the producers of a certain kind of commodity into anautonomous democracy, subject to State control as regards the price oftheir commodity but not as to the manner of its production.Education, marriage, and religion are essentially creative, yet allthree have been vitiated by the intrusion of possessive motives.Education is usually treated as a means of prolonging the _status quo_by instilling prejudices, rather than of creating free thought and anoble outlook by the example of generous feeling and the stimulus ofmental adventure. In marriage, love, which is creative, is kept inchains by jealousy, which is possessive. Religion, which should setfree the creative vision of the spirit, is usually more concernedto repress the life of instinct and to combat the subversiveness ofthought. In all these ways the fear that grows out of precariouspossession has replaced the hope inspired by creative force. The wishto plunder others is recognized, in theory, to be bad; but the fear ofbeing plundered is little better. Yet these two motives between themdominate nine-tenths of politics and private life.The creative impulses in different men are essentially harmonious,since what one man creates cannot be a hindrance to what another iswishing to create. It is the possessive impulses that involve conflict.Although, morally and politically, the creative and possessive impulsesare opposites, yet psychologically either passes easily into theother, according to the accidents of circumstance and opportunity. Thegenesis of impulses and the causes which make them change ought to bestudied; education and social institutions ought to be made such asto strengthen the impulses which harmonize in different men, and toweaken those that involve conflict. I have no doubt that what might beaccomplished in this way is almost unlimited.It is rather through impulse than through will that individual livesand the life of the community can derive the strength unity of asingle direction. Will is of two kinds, of which one is directedoutward and the other inward. The first, which is directed outward,is called into play by external obstacles, either the opposition ofothers or the technical difficulties of an undertaking. This kind ofwill is an expression of strong impulse or desire, whenever instantsuccess is impossible; it exists in all whose life is vigorous, andonly decays when their vital force is enfeebled. It is necessary tosuccess in any difficult enterprise, and without it great achievementis very rare. But the will which is directed inward is only necessaryin so far as there is an inner conflict of impulses or desires; aperfectly harmonious nature would have no occasion for inward will.Such perfect harmony is of course a scarcely realizable ideal: in allmen impulses arise which are incompatible with their central purpose,and which must be checked if their life as a whole is not to be afailure. But this will happen least with those whose central impulsesare strongest; and it will happen less often in a society which aimsat freedom than in a society like ours, which is full of artificialincompatibilities created by antiquated institutions and a tyrannouspublic opinion. The power to exert inward will when the occasion arisesmust always be needed by those who wish their lives to embody somecentral purpose, but with better institutions the occasions when inwardwill is necessary might be made fewer and less important. This resultis very much to be desired, because when will checks impulses which areonly accidentally harmful, it diverts a force which might be spent onovercoming outward obstacles, and if the impulses checked are strongand serious, it actually diminishes the vital force available. A lifefull of inhibitions is likely not to remain a very vigorous life butto become listless and without zest. Impulse tends to die when it isconstantly held in check, and if it does not die, it is apt to workunderground, and issue in some form much worse than that in which ithas been checked. For these reasons the necessity for using inward willought to be avoided as much as possible, and consistency of actionought to spring rather from consistency of impulse than from control ofimpulse by will.The unifying of life ought not to demand the suppression of the casualdesires that make amusement and play; on the contrary, everything oughtto be done to make it easy to combine the main purposes of life withall kinds of pleasure that are not in their nature harmful. Such thingsas habitual drunkenness, drugs, cruel sports, or pleasure in inflictingpain are essentially harmful, but most of the amusements that civilizedmen naturally enjoy are either not harmful at all or only accidentallyharmful through some effect which might be avoided in a better society.What is needed is, not asceticism or a drab Puritanism, but capacityfor strong impulses and desires directed towards large creative ends.When such impulses and desires are vigorous, they bring with them, ofthemselves, what is needed to make a good life.But although amusement and adventure ought to have their share, it isimpossible to create a good life if they are what is mainly desired.Subjectivism, the habit of directing thought and desire to our ownstates of mind rather than to something objective, inevitably makeslife fragmentary and unprogressive. The man to whom amusement is theend of life tends to lose interest gradually in the things out ofwhich he has been in the habit of obtaining amusement, since he doesnot value these things on their own account, but on account of thefeelings which they arouse in him. When they are no longer amusing,boredom drives him to seek some new stimulus, which fails him in itsturn. Amusement consists in a series of moments without any essentialcontinuity; a purpose which unifies life is one which requires someprolonged activity, and is like building a monument rather than achild’s castle in the sand.Subjectivism has other forms beside the mere pursuit of amusement.Many men, when they are in love, are more interested in their ownemotion than in the object of their love; such love does not lead toany essential union, but leaves fundamental separateness undiminished.As soon as the emotion grows less vivid the experience has served itspurpose, and there seems no motive for prolonging it. In another way,the same evil of subjectivism was fostered by Protestant religion andmorality, since they directed attention to sin and the state of thesoul rather than to the outer world and our relations with it. Noneof these forms of subjectivism can prevent a man’s life from beingfragmentary and isolated. Only a life which springs out of dominantimpulses directed to objective ends can be a satisfactory whole, or beintimately united with the lives of others.The pursuit of pleasure and the pursuit of virtue alike suffer fromsubjectivism: Epicureanism and Stoicism are infected with the sametaint. Marcus Aurelius, enacting good laws in order that he mightbe virtuous, is not an attractive figure. Subjectivism is a naturaloutcome of a life in which there is much more thought than action:while outer things are being remembered or desired, not actuallyexperienced, they seem to become mere ideas. What they are inthemselves becomes less interesting to us than the effects which theyproduce in our own minds. Such a result tends to be brought about byincreasing civilization, because increasing civilization continuallydiminishes the need for vivid action and enhances the opportunitiesfor thought. But thought will not have this bad result if it is activethought, directed towards achieving some purpose; it is only passivethought that leads to subjectivism. What is needed is to keep thoughtin intimate union with impulses and desires, making it always itselfan activity with an objective purpose. Otherwise, thought and impulsebecome enemies, to the great detriment of both.In order to make the lives of average men and women less fragmentaryand separate, and to give greater opportunity for carrying out creativeimpulses, it is not enough to know the goal we wish to reach, or toproclaim the excellence of what we desire to achieve. It is necessaryto understand the effect of institutions and beliefs upon the life ofimpulse, and to discover ways of improving this effect by a changein institutions. And when this intellectual work has been done, ourthought will still remain barren unless we can bring it into relationwith some powerful political force. The only powerful political forcefrom which any help is to be expected in bringing about such changesas seem needed is Labor. The changes required are very largely suchas Labor may be expected to welcome, especially during the time ofhardship after the war. When the war is over, labor discontent is sureto be very prevalent throughout Europe, and to constitute a politicalforce by means of which a great and sweeping reconstruction may beeffected.The civilized world has need of fundamental change if it is to be savedfrom decay—change both in its economic structure and in its philosophyof life. Those of us who feel the need of change must not sit still indull despair: we can, if we choose, profoundly influence the future. Wecan discover and preach the kind of change that is required—the kindthat preserves what is positive in the vital beliefs of our time, and,by eliminating what is negative and inessential, produces a synthesisto which all that is not purely reactionary can give allegiance. Assoon as it has become clear what _kind_ of change is required, it willbe possible to work out its parts in more detail. But until the war isended there is little use in detail, since we do not know what kind ofworld the war will leave. The only thing that seems indubitable is thatmuch new thought will be required in the new world produced by thewar. Traditional views will give little help. It is clear that men’smost important actions are not guided by the sort of motives that areemphasized in traditional political philosophies. The impulses by whichthe war has been produced and sustained come out of a deeper regionthan that of most political argument. And the opposition to the waron the part of those few who have opposed it comes from the same deepregion. A political theory, if it is to hold in times of stress, musttake account of the impulses that underlie explicit thought: it mustappeal to them, and it must discover how to make them fruitful ratherthan destructive.Economic systems have a great influence in promoting or destroyinglife. Except slavery, the present industrial system is the mostdestructive of life that has ever existed. Machinery and large-scaleproduction are ineradicable, and must survive in any better systemwhich is to replace the one under which we live. Industrial federaldemocracy is probably the best direction for reform to take.Philosophies of life, when they are widely believed, also have avery great influence on the vitality of a community. The most widelyaccepted philosophy of life at present is that what matters most toa man’s happiness is his income. This philosophy, apart from otherdemerits, is harmful because it leads men to aim at a result ratherthan an activity, an enjoyment of material goods in which men are notdifferentiated, rather than a creative impulse which embodies eachman’s individuality. More refined philosophies, such as are instilledby higher education, are too apt to fix attention on the past ratherthan the future, and on correct behavior rather than effective action.It is not in such philosophies that men will find the energy to bearlightly the weight of tradition and of ever-accumulating knowledge.The world has need of a philosophy, or a religion, which will promotelife. But in order to promote life it is necessary to value somethingother than mere life. Life devoted only to life is animal withoutany real human value, incapable of preserving men permanently fromweariness and the feeling that all is vanity. If life is to be fullyhuman it must serve some end which seems, in some sense, outsidehuman life, some end which is impersonal and above mankind, such asGod or truth or beauty. Those who best promote life do not have lifefor their purpose. They aim rather at what seems like a gradualincarnation, a bringing into our human existence of something eternal,something that appears to imagination to live in a heaven remote fromstrife and failure and the devouring jaws of Time. Contact with thiseternal world—even if it be only a world of our imagining—brings astrength and a fundamental peace which cannot be wholly destroyedby the struggles and apparent failures of our temporal life. It isthis happy contemplation of what is eternal that Spinoza calls theintellectual love of God. To those who have once known it, it is thekey of wisdom.What we have to do practically is different for each one of us,according to our capacities and opportunities. But if we have the lifeof the spirit within us, what we must do and what we must avoid willbecome apparent to us.By contact with what is eternal, by devoting our life to bringingsomething of the Divine into this troubled world, we can make our ownlives creative even now, even in the midst of the cruelty and strifeand hatred that surround us on every hand. To make the individual lifecreative is far harder in a community based on possession than it wouldbe in such a community as human effort may be able to build up in thefuture. Those who are to begin the regeneration of the world must faceloneliness, opposition, poverty, obloquy. They must be able to liveby truth and love, with a rational unconquerable hope; they must behonest and wise, fearless, and guided by a consistent purpose. A bodyof men and women so inspired will conquer—first the difficulties andperplexities of their individual lives, then, in time, though perhapsonly in a long time, the outer world. Wisdom and hope are what theworld needs; and though it fights against them, it gives its respect tothem in the end.When the Goths sacked Rome, St. Augustine wrote the “City of God,”putting a spiritual hope in place of the material reality that had beendestroyed. Throughout the centuries that followed St. Augustine’s hopelived and gave life, while Rome sank to a village of hovels. For us,too, it is necessary to create a new hope, to build up by our thoughta better world than the one which is hurling itself into ruin. Becausethe times are bad, more is required of us than would be required innormal times. Only a supreme fire of thought and spirit can save futuregenerations from the death that has befallen the generation which weknew and loved.It has been my good fortune to come in contact as a teacher with youngmen of many different nations—young men in whom hope was alive, inwhom the creative energy existed that would have realized in the worldsome part at least of the imagined beauty by which they lived. Theyhave been swept into the war, some on one side, some on the other.Some are still fighting, some are maimed for life, some are dead; ofthose who survive it is to be feared that many will have lost the lifeof the spirit, that hope will have died, that energy will be spent,and that the years to come will be only a weary journey towards thegrave. Of all this tragedy, not a few of those who teach seem to haveno feeling: with ruthless logic, they prove that these young men havebeen sacrificed unavoidably for some coldly abstract end; undisturbedthemselves, they lapse quickly into comfort after any momentary assaultof feeling. In such men the life of the spirit is dead. If it wereliving, it would go out to meet the spirit in the young, with a loveas poignant as the love of father or mother. It would be unaware ofthe bounds of self; their tragedy would be its own. Something wouldcry out: “No, this is not right; this is not good; this is not a holycause, in which the brightness of youth is destroyed and dimmed. Itis we, the old, who have sinned; we have sent these young men to thebattlefield for our evil passions, our spiritual death, our failure tolive generously out of the warmth of the heart and out of the livingvision of the spirit. Let us come out of this death, for it is we whoare dead, not the young men who have died through our fear of life.Their very ghosts have more life than we: they hold us up for ever tothe shame and obloquy of all the ages to come. Out of their ghosts mustcome life, and it is we whom they must vivify.”