Almost all the changes which the world has undergone since theend of the Middle Ages are due to the discovery and diffusion ofnew knowledge. This was the primary cause of the Renaissance, theReformation, and the industrial revolution. It was also, very directly,the cause of the decay of dogmatic religion. The study of classicaltexts and early Church history, Copernican astronomy and physics,Darwinian biology and comparative anthropology, have each in turnbattered down some part of the edifice of Catholic dogma, until,for almost all thinking and instructed people, the most that seemsdefensible is some inner spirit, some vague hope, and some not verydefinite feeling of moral obligation. This result might perhaps haveremained limited to the educated minority but for the fact that theChurches have almost everywhere opposed political progress with thesame bitterness with which they have opposed progress in thought.Political conservatism has brought the Churches into conflict withwhatever was vigorous in the working classes, and has spread freethought in wide circles which might otherwise have remained orthodoxfor centuries. The decay of dogmatic religion is, for good or evil,one of the most important facts in the modern world. Its effects havehardly yet begun to show themselves: what they will be it is impossibleto say, but they will certainly be profound and far-reaching.Religion is partly personal, partly social: to the Protestant primarilypersonal, to the Catholic primarily social. It is only when the twoelements are intimately blended that religion becomes a powerfulforce in molding society. The Catholic Church, as it existed from thetime of Constantine to the time of the Reformation, represented ablending which would have seemed incredible if it had not been actuallyachieved, the blending of Christ and Cæsar, of the morality of humblesubmission with the pride of Imperial Rome. Those who loved the onecould find it in the Thebaid; those who loved the other could admire itin the pomp of metropolitan archbishops. In St. Francis and InnocentIII the same two sides of the Church are still represented. Butsince the Reformation personal religion has been increasingly outsidethe Catholic Church, while the religion which has remained Catholichas been increasingly a matter of institutions and politics andhistoric continuity. This division has weakened the force of religion:religious bodies have not been strengthened by the enthusiasm andsingle-mindedness of the men in whom personal religion is strong, andthese men have not found their teaching diffused and made permanent bythe power of ecclesiastical institutions.The Catholic Church achieved, during the Middle Ages, the most organicsociety and the most harmonious inner synthesis of instinct, mind,and spirit, that the Western world has ever known. St. Francis,Thomas Aquinas, and Dante represent its summit as regards individualdevelopment. The cathedrals, the mendicant Orders, and the triumph ofthe Papacy over the Empire represent its supreme political success.But the perfection which had been achieved was a narrow perfection:instinct, mind, and spirit all suffered from curtailment in order tofit into the pattern; laymen found themselves subject to the Church inways which they resented, and the Church used its power for rapacityand oppression. The perfect synthesis was an enemy to new growth, andafter the time of Dante all that was living in the world had first tofight for its right to live against the representatives of the oldorder. This fight is even now not ended. Only when it is quite ended,both in the external world of politics and in the internal world ofmen’s own thoughts, will it be possible for a new organic society anda new inner synthesis to take the place which the Church held for athousand years.The clerical profession suffers from two causes, one of which it shareswith some other professions, while the other is peculiar to itself.The cause peculiar to it is the convention that clergymen are morevirtuous than other men. Any average selection of mankind, set apartand told that it excels the rest in virtue, must tend to sink below theaverage. This is an ancient commonplace in regard to princes and thosewho used to be called “the great.” But it is no less true as regardsthose of the clergy who are not genuinely and by nature as much betterthan the average as they are conventionally supposed to be. The othersource of harm to the clerical profession is endowments. Propertywhich is only available for those who will support an establishedinstitution has a tendency to warp men’s judgments as to the excellenceof the institution. The tendency is aggravated when the property isassociated with social consideration and opportunities for petty power.It is at its worst when the institution is tied by law to an ancientcreed, almost impossible to change, and yet quite out of touch withthe unfettered thought of the present day. All these causes combine todamage the moral force of the Church.It is not so much that the creed of the Church is the wrong one. Whatis amiss is the mere existence of a creed. As soon as income, position,and power are dependent upon acceptance of no matter what creed,intellectual honesty is imperiled. Men will tell themselves that aformal assent is justified by the good which it will enable them to do.They fail to realize that, in those whose mental life has any vigor,loss of complete intellectual integrity puts an end to the power ofdoing good, by producing gradually in all directions an inability tosee truth simply. The strictness of party discipline has introduced thesame evil in politics; there, because the evil is comparatively new, itis visible to many who think it unimportant as regards the Church. Butthe evil is greater as regards the Church, because religion is of moreimportance than politics, and because it is more necessary that theexponents of religion should be wholly free from taint.The evils we have been considering seem inseparable from the existenceof a professional priesthood. If religion is not to be harmful in aworld of rapid change, it must, like the Society of Friends, be carriedon by men who have other occupations during the week, who do theirreligious work from enthusiasm, without receiving any payment. And suchmen, because they know the everyday world, are not likely to fall intoa remote morality which no one regards as applicable to common life.Being free, they will not be bound to reach certain conclusions decidedin advance, but will be able to consider moral and religious questionsgenuinely, without bias. Except in a quite stationary society, noreligious life can be living or a real support to the spirit unless itis freed from the incubus of a professional priesthood.It is largely for these reasons that so little of what is valuable inmorals and religion comes nowadays from the men who are eminent inthe religious world. It is true that among professed believers thereare many who are wholly sincere, who feel still the inspiration whichChristianity brought before it had been weakened by the progress ofknowledge. These sincere believers are valuable to the world becausethey keep alive the conviction that the life of the spirit is what isof most importance to men and women. Some of them, in all the countriesnow at war, have had the courage to preach peace and love in the nameof Christ, and have done what lay in their power to mitigate thebitterness of hatred. All praise is due to these men, and without themthe world would be even worse than it is.But it is not through even the most sincere and courageous believersin the traditional religion that a new spirit can come into the world.It is not through them that religion can be brought back to those whohave lost it because their minds were active, not because their spiritwas dead. Believers in the traditional religion necessarily look tothe past for inspiration rather than to the future. They seek wisdomin the teaching of Christ, which, admirable as it is, remains quiteinadequate for many of the social and spiritual issues of modern life.Art and intellect and all the problems of government are ignored inthe Gospels. Those who, like Tolstoy, endeavor seriously to take theGospels as a guide to life are compelled to regard the ignorant peasantas the best type of man, and to brush aside political questions by anextreme and impracticable anarchism.If a religious view of life and the world is ever to reconquer thethoughts and feelings of free-minded men and women, much that we areaccustomed to associate with religion will have to be discarded. Thefirst and greatest change that is required is to establish a moralityof initiative, not a morality of submission, a morality of hope ratherthan fear, of things to be done rather than of things to be leftundone. It is not the whole duty of man to slip through the world soas to escape the wrath of God. The world is _our_ world, and it restswith us to make it a heaven or a hell. The power is ours, and thekingdom and the glory would be ours also if we had courage and insightto create them. The religious life that we must seek will not be oneof occasional solemnity and superstitious prohibitions, it will not besad or ascetic, it will concern itself little with rules of conduct.It will be inspired by a vision of what human life may be, and willbe happy with the joy of creation, living in a large free world ofinitiative and hope. It will love mankind, not for what they are tothe outward eye, but for what imagination shows that they have it inthem to become. It will not readily condemn, but it will give praise topositive achievement rather than negative sinlessness, to the joy oflife, the quick affection, the creative insight, by which the world maygrow young and beautiful and filled with vigor.“Religion” is a word which has many meanings and a long history. Inorigin, it was concerned with certain rites, inherited from a remotepast, performed originally for some reason long since forgotten, andassociated from time to time with various myths to account for theirsupposed importance. Much of this lingers still. A religious man is onewho goes to church, a communicant, one who “practises,” as Catholicssay. How he behaves otherwise, or how he feels concerning life andman’s place in the world, does not bear upon the question whether heis “religious” in this simple but historically correct sense. Many menand women are religious in this sense without having in their naturesanything that deserves to be called religion in the sense in which Imean the word. The mere familiarity of the Church service has madethem impervious to it; they are unconscious of all the history andhuman experience by which the liturgy has been enriched, and unmovedby the glibly repeated words of the Gospel, which condemn almost allthe activities of those who fancy themselves disciples of Christ. Thisfate must overtake any habitual rite: it is impossible that it shouldcontinue to produce much effect after it has been performed so often asto grow mechanical.The activities of men may be roughly derived from three sources, notin actual fact sharply separate one from another, but sufficientlydistinguishable to deserve different names. The three sources I meanare instinct, mind, and spirit, and of these three it is the life ofthe spirit that makes religion.The life of instinct includes all that man shares with the loweranimals, all that is concerned with self-preservation and reproductionand the desires and impulses derivative from these. It includes vanityand love of possessions, love of family, and even much of what makeslove of country. It includes all the impulses that are essentiallyconcerned with the biological success of oneself or one’s group—foramong gregarious animals the life of instinct includes the group. Theimpulses which it includes may not in fact make for success, and mayoften in fact militate against it, but are nevertheless those of whichsuccess is the _raison d’être_, those which express the animal natureof man and his position among a world of competitors.The life of the mind is the life of pursuit of knowledge, from merechildish curiosity up to the greatest efforts of thought. Curiosityexists in animals, and serves an obvious biological purpose; but itis only in men that it passes beyond the investigation of particularobjects which may be edible or poisonous, friendly or hostile.Curiosity is the primary impulse out of which the whole edifice ofscientific knowledge has grown. Knowledge has been found so usefulthat most actual acquisition of it is no longer prompted by curiosity;innumerable other motives now contribute to foster the intellectuallife. Nevertheless, direct love of knowledge and dislike of error stillplay a very large part, especially with those who are most successfulin learning. No man acquires much knowledge unless the acquisition isin itself delightful to him, apart from any consciousness of the useto which the knowledge may be put. The impulse to acquire knowledgeand the activities which center round it constitute what I mean by thelife of the mind. The life of the mind consists of thought which iswholly or partially impersonal, in the sense that it concerns itselfwith objects on their own account, and not merely on account of theirbearing upon our instinctive life.The life of the spirit centers round impersonal feeling, as the lifeof the mind centers round impersonal thought. In this sense, all artbelongs to the life of the spirit, though its greatness is derivedfrom its being also intimately bound up with the life of instinct. Artstarts from instinct and rises into the region of the spirit; religionstarts from the spirit and endeavors to dominate and inform the lifeof instinct. It is possible to feel the same interest in the joys andsorrows of others as in our own, to love and hate independently ofall relation to ourselves, to care about the destiny of man and thedevelopment of the universe without a thought that we are personallyinvolved. Reverence and worship, the sense of an obligation tomankind, the feeling of imperativeness and acting under orders whichtraditional religion has interpreted as Divine inspiration, allbelong to the life of the spirit. And deeper than all these lies thesense of a mystery half revealed, of a hidden wisdom and glory, of atransfiguring vision in which common things lose their solid importanceand become a thin veil behind which the ultimate truth of the world isdimly seen. It is such feelings that are the source of religion, and ifthey were to die most of what is best would vanish out of life.Instinct, mind, and spirit are all essential to a full life; each hasits own excellence and its own corruption. Each can attain a spuriousexcellence at the expense of the others; each has a tendency toencroach upon the others; but in the life which is to be sought allthree will be developed in coördination, and intimately blended in asingle harmonious whole. Among uncivilized men instinct is supreme,and mind and spirit hardly exist. Among educated men at the presentday mind is developed, as a rule, at the expense of both instinct andspirit, producing a curious inhumanity and lifelessness, a paucityof both personal and impersonal desires, which leads to cynicism andintellectual destructiveness. Among ascetics and most of those whowould be called saints, the life of the spirit has been developedat the expense of instinct and mind, producing an outlook which isimpossible to those who have a healthy animal life and to those whohave a love of active thought. It is not in any of these one-sideddevelopments that we can find wisdom or a philosophy which will bringnew life to the civilized world.Among civilized men and women at the present day it is rare to findinstinct, mind, and spirit in harmony. Very few have achieved apractical philosophy which gives its due place to each; as a rule,instinct is at war with either mind or spirit, and mind and spirit areat war with each other. This strife compels men and women to directmuch of their energy inwards, instead of being able to expend it allin objective activities. When a man achieves a precarious inward peaceby the defeat of a part of his nature, his vital force is impaired,and his growth is no longer quite healthy. If men are to remain whole,it is very necessary that they should achieve a reconciliation ofinstinct, mind, and spirit.Instinct is the source of vitality, the bond that unites the life ofthe individual with the life of the race, the basis of all profoundsense of union with others, and the means by which the collective lifenourishes the life of the separate units. But instinct by itself leavesus powerless to control the forces of Nature, either in ourselvesor in our physical environment, and keeps us in bondage to the sameunthinking impulse by which the trees grow. Mind can liberate us fromthis bondage, by the power of impersonal thought, which enables us tojudge critically the purely biological purposes towards which instinctmore or less blindly tends. But mind, in its dealings with instinct,is _merely_ critical: so far as instinct is concerned, the uncheckedactivity of the mind is apt to be destructive and to generate cynicism.Spirit is an antidote to the cynicism of mind: it universalizes theemotions that spring from instinct, and by universalizing them makesthem impervious to mental criticism. And when thought is informed byspirit it loses its cruel, destructive quality; it no longer promotesthe death of instinct, but only its purification from insistence andruthlessness and its emancipation from the prison walls of accidentalcircumstance. It is instinct that gives force, mind that gives themeans of directing force to desired ends, and spirit that suggestsimpersonal uses for force of a kind that thought cannot discredit bycriticism. This is an outline of the parts that instinct, mind, andspirit would play in a harmonious life.Instinct, mind, and spirit are each a help to the others when theirdevelopment is free and unvitiated; but when corruption comes into anyone of the three, not only does that one fail, but the others alsobecome poisoned. All three must grow together. And if they are to growto their full stature in any one man or woman, that man or woman mustnot be isolated, but must be one of a society where growth is notthwarted and made crooked.The life of instinct, when it is unchecked by mind or spirit,consists of instinctive cycles, which begin with impulses to moreor less definite acts, and pass on to satisfaction of needs throughthe consequences of these impulsive acts. Impulse and desire are notdirected towards the whole cycle, but only towards its initiation:the rest is left to natural causes. We desire to eat, but we do notdesire to be nourished unless we are valetudinarians. Yet withoutthe nourishment eating is a mere momentary pleasure, not part of thegeneral impulse to life. Men desire sexual intercourse, but theydo not as a rule desire children strongly or often. Yet without thehope of children and its occasional realization, sexual intercourseremains for most people an isolated and separate pleasure, not unitingtheir personal life with the life of mankind, not continuous with thecentral purposes by which they live, and not capable of bringing thatprofound sense of fulfilment which comes from completion by children.Most men, unless the impulse is atrophied through disuse, feel a desireto create something, great or small according to their capacities.Some few are able to satisfy this desire: some happy men can create anEmpire, a science, a poem, or a picture. The men of science, who haveless difficulty than any others in finding an outlet for creativeness,are the happiest of intelligent men in the modern world, since theircreative activity affords full satisfaction to mind and spirit as wellas to the instinct of creation.[21] In them a beginning is to be seenof the new way of life which is to be sought; in their happiness wemay perhaps find the germ of a future happiness for all mankind. Therest, with few exceptions, are thwarted in their creative impulses.They cannot build their own house or make their own garden, or directtheir own labor to producing what their free choice would lead them toproduce. In this way the instinct of creation, which should lead on tothe life of mind and spirit, is checked and turned aside. Too often itis turned to destruction, as the only effective action which remainspossible. Out of its defeat grows envy, and out of envy grows theimpulse to destroy the creativeness of more fortunate men. This is oneof the greatest sources of corruption in the life of instinct.The life of instinct is important, not only on its own account, orbecause of the direct usefulness of the actions which it inspires, butalso because, if it is unsatisfactory, the individual life becomesdetached and separated from the general life of man. All reallyprofound sense of unity with others depends upon instinct, uponcoöperation or agreement in some instinctive purpose. This is mostobvious in the relations of men and women and parents and children.But it is true also in wider relations. It is true of large assembliesswayed by a strong common emotion, and even of a whole nation intimes of stress. It is part of what makes the value of religion as asocial institution. Where this feeling is wholly absent, other humanbeings seem distant and aloof. Where it is actively thwarted, otherhuman beings become objects of instinctive hostility. The aloofnessor the instinctive hostility may be masked by religious love, whichcan be given to all men regardless of their relation to ourselves. Butreligious love does not bridge the gulf that parts man from man: itlooks across the gulf, it views others with compassion or impersonalsympathy, but it does not live with the same life with which they live.Instinct alone can do this, but only when it is fruitful and sane anddirect. To this end it is necessary that instinctive cycles should befairly often completed, not interrupted in the middle of their course.At present they are constantly interrupted, partly by purposes whichconflict with them for economic or other reasons, partly by the pursuitof pleasure, which picks out the most agreeable part of the cycle andavoids the rest. In this way instinct is robbed of its importance andseriousness; it becomes incapable of bringing any real fulfilment, itsdemands grow more and more excessive, and life becomes no longer awhole with a single movement, but a series of detached moments, some ofthem pleasurable, most of them full of weariness and discouragement.The life of the mind, although supremely excellent in itself, cannotbring health into the life of instinct, except when it results in a nottoo difficult outlet for the instinct of creation. In other cases itis, as a rule, too widely separated from instinct, too detached, toodestitute of inward growth, to afford either a vehicle for instinctor a means of subtilizing and refining it. Thought is in its essenceimpersonal and detached, instinct is in its essence personal and tiedto particular circumstances: between the two, unless both reach ahigh level, there is a war which is not easily appeased. This is thefundamental reason for vitalism, futurism, pragmatism, and the variousother philosophies which advertise themselves as vigorous and virile.All these represent the attempt to find a mode of thought which shallnot be hostile to instinct. The attempt, in itself, is deserving ofpraise, but the solution offered is far too facile. What is proposedamounts to a subordination of thought to instinct, a refusal to allowthought to achieve its own ideal. Thought which does not rise abovewhat is personal is not thought in any true sense: it is merely a moreor less intelligent use of instinct. It is thought and spirit thatraise man above the level of the brutes. By discarding them we may losethe proper excellence of men, but cannot acquire the excellence ofanimals. Thought must achieve its full growth before a reconciliationwith instinct is attempted.When refined thought and unrefined instinct coexist, as they do in manyintellectual men, the result is a complete disbelief in any importantgood to be achieved by the help of instinct. According to theirdisposition, some such men will as far as possible discard instinct andbecome ascetic, while others will accept it as a necessity, leavingit degraded and separated from all that is really important in theirlives. Either of these courses prevents instinct from remaining vital,or from being a bond with others; either produces a sense of physicalsolitude, a gulf across which the minds and spirits of others mayspeak, but not their instincts. To very many men, the instinct ofpatriotism, when the war broke out, was the first instinct that hadbridged the gulf, the first that had made them feel a really profoundunity with others. This instinct, just because, in its intense form,it was new and unfamiliar, had remained uninfected by thought, notparalyzed or devitalized by doubt and cold detachment. The sense ofunity which it brought is capable of being brought by the instinctivelife of more normal times, if thought and spirit are not hostile toit. And so long as this sense of unity is absent, instinct and spiritcannot be in harmony, nor can the life of the community have vigor andthe seeds of new growth.The life of the mind, because of its detachment, tends to separate aman inwardly from other men, so long as it is not balanced by the lifeof the spirit. For this reason, mind without spirit can render instinctcorrupt or atrophied, but cannot add any excellence to the life ofinstinct. On this ground, some men are hostile to thought. But no goodpurpose is served by trying to prevent the growth of thought, which hasits own insistence, and if checked in the directions in which it tendsnaturally, will turn into other directions where it is more harmful.And thought is in itself god-like: if the opposition between thoughtand instinct were irreconcilable, it would be thought that ought toconquer. But the opposition is not irreconciliable: all that isnecessary is that both thought and instinct should be informed by thelife of the spirit.In order that human life should have vigor, it is necessary for theinstinctive impulses to be strong and direct; but in order that humanlife should be good, these impulses must be dominated and controlledby desires less personal and ruthless, less liable to lead to conflictthan those that are inspired by instinct alone. Something impersonaland universal is needed over and above what springs out of theprinciple of individual growth. It is this that is given by the life ofthe spirit.Patriotism affords an example of the kind of control which is needed.Patriotism is compounded out of a number of instinctive feelings andimpulses: love of home, love of those whose ways and outlook resembleour own, the impulse to coöperation in a group, the sense of pridein the achievements of one’s group. All these impulses and desires,like everything belonging to the life of instinct, are personal, inthe sense that the feelings and actions which they inspire towardsothers are determined by the relation of those others to ourselves,not by what those others are intrinsically. All these impulses anddesires unite to produce a love of man’s own country which is moredeeply implanted in the fiber of his being, and more closely united tohis vital force, than any love not rooted in instinct. But if spiritdoes not enter in to generalize love of country, the exclusiveness ofinstinctive love makes it a source of hatred of other countries. Whatspirit can effect is to make us realize that other countries equallyare worthy of love, that the vital warmth which makes us love our owncountry reveals to us that it deserves to be loved, and that only thepoverty of our nature prevents us from loving all countries as we loveour own. In this way instinctive love can be extended in imagination,and a sense of the value of all mankind can grow up, which is moreliving and intense than any that is possible to those whose instinctivelove is weak. Mind can only show us that it is irrational to love ourown country best; it can weaken patriotism, but cannot strengthenthe love of all mankind. Spirit alone can do this, by extending anduniversalizing the love that is born of instinct. And in doing this itchecks and purifies whatever is insistent or ruthless or oppressivelypersonal in the life of instinct.The same extension through spirit is necessary with other instinctiveloves, if they are not to be enfeebled or corrupted by thought. Thelove of husband and wife is capable of being a very good thing, andwhen men and women are sufficiently primitive nothing but instinctand good fortune is needed to make it reach a certain limitedperfection. But as thought begins to assert its right to criticizeinstinct the old simplicity becomes impossible. The love of husbandand wife, as unchecked instinct leaves it, is too narrow and personalto stand against the shafts of satire, until it is enriched by thelife of the spirit. The romantic view of marriage, which our fathersand mothers professed to believe, will not survive an imaginativeperegrination down a street of suburban villas, each containing itscouple, each couple having congratulated themselves as they firstcrossed the threshold, that here they could love in peace, withoutinterruption from others, without contact with the cold outside world.The separateness and stuffiness, the fine names for cowardices andtimid vanities, that are shut within the four walls of thousands uponthousands of little villas, present themselves coldly and mercilesslyto those in whom mind is dominant at the expense of spirit.Nothing is good in the life of a human being except the very best thathis nature can achieve. As men advance, things which have been goodcease to be good, merely because something better is possible. So it iswith the life of instinct: for those whose mental life is strong, muchthat was really good while mind remained less developed has now becomebad merely through the greater degree of truth in their outlook on theworld. The instinctive man in love feels that his emotion is unique,that the lady of his heart has perfections such as no other woman everequaled. The man who has acquired the power of impersonal thoughtrealizes, when he is in love, that he is one of so many millions ofmen who are in love at this moment, that not more than one of all themillions can be right in thinking his love supreme, and that it is notlikely that that one is oneself. He perceives that the state of beingin love in those whose instinct is unaffected by thought or spirit,is a state of illusion, serving the ends of Nature and making a mana slave to the life of the species, not a willing minister to theimpersonal ends which he sees to be good. Thought rejects this slavery;for no end that Nature may have in view will thought abdicate, or forgoits right to think truly. “Better the world should perish than thatI or any other human being should believe a lie”—this is the religionof thought, in whose scorching flames the dross of the world is beingburnt away. It is a good religion, and its work of destruction must becompleted. But it is not all that man has need of. New growth must comeafter the destruction, and new growth can come only through the spirit.Both patriotism and the love of man and woman, when they are merelyinstinctive, have the same defects: their exclusions, their enclosingwalls, their indifference or hostility to the outside world. It isthrough this that thought is led to satire, that comedy has infectedwhat men used to consider their holiest feelings. The satire and thecomedy are justified, but not the death of instinct which they mayproduce if they remain in supreme command. They are justified, not asthe last word of wisdom but as the gateway of pain through which menpass to a new life, where instinct is purified and yet nourished by thedeeper desires and insight of spirit.The man who has the life of the spirit within him views the love of manand woman, both in himself and in others, quite differently from theman who is exclusively dominated by mind. He sees, in his moments ofinsight, that in all human beings there is something deserving of love,something mysterious, something appealing, a cry out of the night, agroping journey, and a possible victory. When his instinct loves, hewelcomes its help in seeing and feeling the value of the human beingwhom he loves. Instinct becomes a reinforcement to spiritual insight.What instinct tells him spiritual insight confirms, however much themind may be aware of littlenesses, limitations, and enclosing wallsthat prevent the spirit from shining forth. His spirit divines in allmen what his instinct shows him in the object of his love.The love of parents for children has need of the same transformation.The purely instinctive love, unchecked by thought, uninformed byspirit, is exclusive, ruthless, and unjust. No benefit to others isfelt, by the purely instinctive parent, to be worth an injury to one’sown children. Honor and conventional morality place certain importantpractical limitations on the vicarious selfishness of parents, sincea civilized community exacts a certain minimum before it will giverespect. But within the limits allowed by public opinion, parentalaffection, when it is merely instinctive, will seek the advantageof children without regard to others. Mind can weaken the impulse toinjustice, and diminish the force of instinctive love, but it cannotkeep the whole force of instinctive love and turn it to more universalends. Spirit can do this. It can leave the instinctive love of childrenundimmed, and extend the poignant devotion of a parent, in imagination,to the whole world. And parental love itself will prompt the parentwho has the life of the spirit to give to his children the sense ofjustice, the readiness for service, the reverence, the will thatcontrols self-seeking, which he feels to be a greater good than anypersonal success.The life of the spirit has suffered in recent times by its associationwith traditional religion, by its apparent hostility to the life of themind, and by the fact that it has seemed to center in renunciation.The life of the spirit demands readiness for renunciation when theoccasion arises, but is in its essence as positive and as capable ofenriching individual existence as mind and instinct are. It brings withit the joy of vision, of the mystery and profundity of the world, ofthe contemplation of life, and above all the joy of universal love.It liberates those who have it from the prison-house of insistentpersonal passion and mundane cares. It gives freedom and breadth andbeauty to men’s thoughts and feelings, and to all their relations withothers. It brings the solution of doubts, the end of the feeling thatall is vanity. It restores harmony between mind and instinct, and leadsthe separated unit back into his place in the life of mankind. Forthose who have once entered the world of thought, it is only throughspirit that happiness and peace can return.