Under the influence of socialism, most liberal thought in recent yearshas been in favor of increasing the power of the State, but more orless hostile to the power of private property. On the other hand,syndicalism has been hostile both to the State and to private property.I believe that syndicalism is more nearly right than socialism in thisrespect, that both private property and the State, which are the twomost powerful institutions of the modern world, have become harmfulto life through excess of power, and that both are hastening the lossof vitality from which the civilized world increasingly suffers.The two institutions are closely connected, but for the present Iwish to consider only the State. I shall try to show how great, howunnecessary, how harmful, many of its powers are, and how enormouslythey might be diminished without loss of what is useful in itsactivity. But I shall admit that in certain directions its functionsought to be extended rather than curtailed.Some of the functions of the State, such as the Post Office andelementary education, might be performed by private agencies, and areonly undertaken by the State from motives of convenience. But othermatters, such as the law, the police, the Army, and the Navy, belongmore essentially to the State: so long as there is a State at all it isdifficult to imagine these matters in private hands. The distinctionbetween socialism and individualism turns on the nonessentialfunctions of the State, which the socialist wishes to extend andthe individualist to restrict. It is the essential functions, whichare admitted by individualists and socialists alike, that I wishto criticize, since the others do not appear to me in themselvesobjectionable.The essence of the State is that it is the repository of the collectiveforce of its citizens. This force takes two forms, one internal and oneexternal. The internal form is the law and the police; the externalform is the power of waging war, as embodied in the Army and Navy. TheState is constituted by the combination of all the inhabitants in acertain area using their united force in accordance with the commandsof a Government. In a civilized State force is only employed againstits own citizens in accordance with rules previously laid down, whichconstitute the criminal law. But the employment of force againstforeigners is not regulated by any code of rules, and proceeds, withfew exceptions, according to some real or fancied national interest.There can be no doubt that force employed according to law is lesspernicious than force employed capriciously. If international law couldacquire sufficient hold on men’s allegiance to regulate the relationsof States, a very great advance on our present condition would havebeen made. The primitive anarchy which precedes law is worse than law.But I believe there is a possibility of a stage to some extent abovelaw, where the advantages now secured by the law are secured withoutloss of freedom, and without the disadvantages which the law and thepolice render inevitable. Probably some repository of force in thebackground will remain necessary, but the actual employment of forcemay become very rare, and the degree of force required very small.The anarchy which precedes law gives freedom only to the strong; thecondition to be aimed at will give freedom as nearly as possible toevery one. It will do this, not by preventing altogether the existenceof organized force, but by limiting the occasions for its employment tothe greatest possible extent.The power of the State is only limited internally by the fear ofrebellion and externally by the fear of defeat in war. Subject to theserestrictions, it is absolute. In practice, it can seize men’s propertythrough taxation, determine the law of marriage and inheritance, punishthe expression of opinions which it dislikes, put men to death forwishing the region they inhabit to belong to a different State, andorder all able-bodied males to risk their lives in battle whenever itconsiders war desirable. On many matters disagreement with the purposesand opinions of the State is criminal. Probably the freest States inthe world, before the war, were America and England; yet in America noimmigrant may land until he has professed disbelief in anarchism andpolygamy, while in England men were sent to prison in recent years forexpressing disagreement with the Christian religion[3] or agreementwith the teaching of Christ.[4] In time of war, all criticism ofthe external policy of the State is criminal. Certain objects havingappeared desirable to the majority, or to the effective holders ofpower, those who do not consider these objects desirable are exposedto pains and penalties not unlike those suffered by heretics in thepast. The extent of the tyranny thus exercised is concealed by its verysuccess: few men consider it worth while to incur a persecution whichis almost certain to be thorough and effective.Universal military service is perhaps the extreme example of the powerof the State, and the supreme illustration of the difference betweenits attitude to its own citizens and its attitude to the citizens ofother States. The State punishes, with impartial rigor, both those whokill their compatriots and those who refuse to kill foreigners. Onthe whole, the latter is considered the graver crime. The phenomenonof war is familiar, and men fail to realize its strangeness; to thosewho stand inside the cycle of instincts which lead to war it all seemsnatural and reasonable. But to those who stand outside the strangenessof it grows with familiarity. It is amazing that the vast majority ofmen should tolerate a system which compels them to submit to all thehorrors of the battlefield at any moment when their Government commandsthem to do so. A French artist, indifferent to politics, attentive onlyto his painting, suddenly finds himself called upon to shoot Germans,who, his friends assure him, are a disgrace to the human race. A Germanmusician, equally unknowing, is called upon to shoot the perfidiousFrenchman. Why cannot the two men declare a mutual neutrality? Why notleave war to those who like it and bring it on? Yet if the two mendeclared a mutual neutrality they would be shot by their compatriots.To avoid this fate they try to shoot each other. If the world losesthe artist, not the musician, Germany rejoices; if the world loses themusician, not the artist, France rejoices. No one remembers the loss tocivilization, which is equal whichever is killed.This is the politics of Bedlam. If the artist and the musician had beenallowed to stand aside from the war, nothing but unmitigated good tomankind would have resulted. The power of the State, which makes thisimpossible, is a wholly evil thing, quite as evil as the power of theChurch which in former days put men to death for unorthodox thought.Yet if, even in time of peace, an international league were founded toconsist of Frenchmen and Germans in equal numbers, all pledged not totake part in war, the French State and the German State would persecuteit with equal ferocity. Blind obedience, unlimited willingness to killand die are exacted of the modern citizens of a democracy as much asof the Janizaries of medieval sultans or the secret agents of Orientaldespots.[5]The power of the State may be brought to bear, as it often is inEngland, through public opinion rather than through the laws. Byoratory and the influence of the Press, public opinion is largelycreated by the State, and a tyrannous public opinion is as great anenemy to liberty as tyrannous laws. If the young man who will notfight finds that he is dismissed from his employment, insulted in thestreets, cold-shouldered by his friends, and thrown over with scorn byany woman who may formerly have liked him, he will feel the penaltyquite as hard to bear as a death sentence.[6] A free community requiresnot only legal freedom, but a tolerant public opinion, an absence ofthat instinctive inquisition into our neighbors’ affairs which, underthe guise of upholding a high moral standard, enables good peopleto indulge unconsciously a disposition to cruelty and persecution.Thinking ill of others is not in itself a good reason for thinking wellof ourselves. But so long as this is not recognized, and so long as theState can manufacture public opinion, except in the rare cases where itis revolutionary, public opinion must be reckoned as a definite part ofthe power of the State.The power of the State outside its own borders is in the main derivedfrom war or the threat of war. Some power is derived from the abilityto persuade its citizens to lend money or not to lend it, but thisis unimportant in comparison with the power derived from armies andnavies. The external activity of the State—with exceptions so rareas to be negligible—is selfish. Sometimes selfishness is mitigatedby the need of retaining the goodwill of other States, but this onlymodifies the methods employed, not the ends pursued. The ends pursued,apart from mere defense against other States, are, on the one hand,opportunities for successful exploitation of weak or uncivilizedcountries, on the other hand, power and prestige, which are consideredmore glorious and less material than money. In pursuit of theseobjects, no State hesitates to put to death innumerable foreignerswhose happiness is not compatible with exploitation or subjection, orto devastate territories into which it is thought necessary to striketerror. Apart from the present war, such acts have been performedwithin the last twenty years by many minor States and by all theGreat Powers[7] except Austria; and in the case of Austria only theopportunity, not the will, was lacking.Why do men acquiesce in the power of the State? There are many reasons,some traditional, some very present and pressing.The traditional reason for obedience to the State is personal loyaltyto the sovereign. European States grew up under the feudal system,and were originally the several territories owned by feudal chiefs.But this source of obedience has decayed, and probably now counts forlittle except in Japan, and to a lesser extent in Russia.Tribal feeling, which always underlay loyalty to the sovereign, hasremained as strong as it ever was, and is now the chief support forthe power of the State. Almost every man finds it essential to hishappiness to feel himself a member of a group, animated by commonfriendships and enmities and banded together for defense and attack.But such groups are of two kinds: there are those which are essentiallyenlargements of the family, and there are those which are based upon aconscious common purpose. Nations belong to the first kind, Churches tothe second. At times when men are profoundly swayed by creeds nationaldivisions tend to break down, as they did in the wars of religionafter the Reformation. At such times a common creed is a stronger bondthan a common nationality. To a much slighter extent, the same thinghas occurred in the modern world with the rise of socialism. Men whodisbelieve in private property, and feel the capitalist the real enemy,have a bond which transcends national divisions. It has not been foundstrong enough to resist the passions aroused by the present war, butit has made them less bitter among socialists than among others, andhas kept alive the hope of a European community to be reconstructedwhen the war is over. In the main, however, the universal disbelief increeds has left tribal feeling triumphant, and has made nationalismstronger than at any previous period of the world’s history. A fewsincere Christians, a few sincere socialists, have found in their creeda force capable of resisting the assaults of national passion, but theyhave been too few to influence the course of events or even to causeserious anxiety to the Governments.It is chiefly tribal feeling that generates the unity of a nationalState, but it is not only tribal feeling that generates its strength.Its strength results principally from two fears, neither of which isunreasonable: the fear of crime and anarchy within, and the fear ofaggression from without.The internal orderliness of a civilized community is a greatachievement, chiefly brought about by the increased authority of theState. It would be inconvenient if peaceable citizens were constantlyin imminent risk of being robbed and murdered. Civilized life wouldbecome almost impossible if adventurous people could organize privatearmies for purposes of plunder. These conditions existed in the MiddleAges, and have not passed away without a great struggle. It is thoughtby many—especially by the rich, who derive the greatest advantage fromlaw and order—that any diminution in the power of the State mightbring back a condition of universal anarchy. They regard strikes asportents of dissolution. They are terrified by such organizations asthe Confédération Générale du Travail and the International Workersof the World. They remember the French Revolution, and feel a notunnatural desire to keep their heads on their shoulders. They dreadparticularly any political theory which seems to excuse private crimes,such as sabotage and political assassination. Against these dangersthey see no protection except the maintenance of the authority of theState, and the belief that all resistance to the State is wicked.Fear of the danger within is enhanced by fear of the danger without.Every State is exposed at all times to the risk of foreign invasion.No means has hitherto been devised for minimizing this risk except theincrease of armaments. But the armaments which are nominally intendedto repel invasion may also be used to invade. And so the means adoptedto diminish the external fear have the effect of increasing it, andof enormously enhancing the destructiveness of war when it does breakout. In this way a reign of terror becomes universal, and the Stateacquires everywhere something of the character of the Comité du SalutPublic.The tribal feeling out of which the State develops is natural, and thefear by which the State is strengthened is reasonable under presentcircumstances. And in addition to these two, there is a third source ofstrength in a national State, namely patriotism in its religious aspect.Patriotism is a very complex feeling, built up out of primitiveinstincts and highly intellectual convictions. There is love of homeand family and friends, making us peculiarly anxious to preserve ourown country from invasion. There is the mild instinctive liking forcompatriots as against foreigners. There is pride, which is bound upwith the success of the community to which we feel that we belong.There is a belief, suggested by pride but reinforced by history, thatone’s own nation represents a great tradition and stands for idealsthat are important to the human race. But besides all these, there isanother element, at once nobler and more open to attack, an element ofworship, of willing sacrifice, of joyful merging of the individual lifein the life of the nation. This religious element in patriotism isessential to the strength of the State, since it enlists the best thatis in most men on the side of national sacrifice.The religious element in patriotism is reinforced by education,especially by a knowledge of the history and literature of one’s owncountry, provided it is not accompanied by much knowledge of thehistory and literature of other countries. In every civilized countryall instruction of the young emphasizes the merits of their own nationand the faults of other nations. It comes to be universally believedthat one’s own nation, because of its superiority, deserves support ina quarrel, however the quarrel may have originated. This belief is sogenuine and deep that it makes men endure patiently, almost gladly, thelosses and hardships and sufferings entailed by war. Like all sincerelybelieved religions, it gives an outlook on life, based upon instinctbut sublimating it, causing a devotion to an end greater than anypersonal end, but containing many personal ends as it were in solution.Patriotism as a religion is unsatisfactory because of its lack ofuniversality. The good at which it aims is a good for one’s ownnation only, not for all mankind. The desires which it inspires inan Englishman are not the same as the desires which it inspires ina German. A world full of patriots may be a world full of strife.The more intensely a nation believes in its patriotism, the morefanatically indifferent it will become to the damage suffered by othernations. When once men have learnt to subordinate their own good to thegood of a larger whole, there can be no valid reason for stopping shortof the human race. It is the admixture of national pride that makesit so easy in practice for men’s impulses towards sacrifice to stopshort at the frontiers of their own country. It is this admixture thatpoisons patriotism, and makes it inferior, as a religion, to beliefswhich aim at the salvation of all mankind. We cannot avoid having morelove for our own country than for other countries, and there is noreason why we should wish to avoid it, any more than we should wish tolove all individual men and women equally. But any adequate religionwill lead us to temper inequality of affection by love of justice, andto universalize our aims by realizing the common needs of man. Thischange was effected by Christianity in Judaism, and must be effected inany merely national religion before it can be purged of evil.In practice, patriotism has many other enemies to contend with.Cosmopolitanism cannot fail to grow as men acquire more knowledge offoreign countries by education and travel. There is also a kind ofindividualism which is continually increasing, a realization that everyman ought to be as nearly free as possible to choose his own ends, notcompelled by a geographical accident to pursue ends forced upon him bythe community. Socialism, syndicalism, and anti-capitalist movementsgenerally, are against patriotism in their tendency, since they makemen aware that the present State is largely concerned in defending theprivileges of the rich, and that many of the conflicts between Stateshave their origin in the financial interests of a few plutocrats.This kind of opposition is perhaps temporary, a mere incident in thestruggle of labor to acquire power. Australia, where labor feels itstriumph secure, is full of patriotism and militarism, based upondetermination to prevent foreign labor from sharing the benefits of aprivileged position. It is not unlikely that England might develop asimilar nationalism if it became a socialist State. But it is probablethat such nationalism would be purely defensive. Schemes of foreignaggression, entailing great loss of life and wealth in the nation whichadopts them, would hardly be initiated except by those whose instinctsof dominion have been sharpened through the power derived from privateproperty and the institutions of the capitalist State.The evil wrought in the modern world by the excessive power of theState is very great, and very little recognized.The chief harm wrought by the State is promotion of efficiency inwar. If all States increase their strength, the balance of power isunchanged, and no one State has a better chance of victory than before.And when the means of offense exist, even though their original purposemay have been defensive, the temptation to use them is likely, sooneror later, to prove overwhelming. In this way the very measures whichpromoted security within the borders of the State promote insecurityelsewhere. It is of the essence of the State to suppress violencewithin and to facilitate it without. The State makes an entirelyartificial division of mankind and of our duties toward them: towardsone group we are bound by the law, towards the other only by theprudence of highwaymen. The State is rendered evil by its exclusions,and by the fact that, whenever it embarks upon aggressive war, itbecomes a combination of men for murder and robbery. The present systemis irrational, since external and internal anarchy must be both rightor both wrong. It is supported because, so long as others adopt it,it is thought the only road to safety, and because it secures thepleasures of triumph and dominion, which cannot be obtained in a goodcommunity. If these pleasures were no longer sought, or no longerpossible to obtain, the problem of securing safety from invasion wouldnot be difficult.Apart from war, the modern great State is harmful from its vastnessand the resulting sense of individual helplessness. The citizen who isout of sympathy with the aims of the State, unless he is a man of veryrare gifts, cannot hope to persuade the State to adopt purposes whichseem to him better. Even in a democracy, all questions except a veryfew are decided by a small number of officials and eminent men; andeven the few questions which are left to the popular vote are decidedby a diffused mass-psychology, not by individual initiative. This isespecially noticeable in a country like the United States, where, inspite of democracy, most men have a sense of almost complete impotencein regard to all large issues. In so vast a country the popular willis like one of the forces of Nature, and seems nearly as much outsidethe control of any one man. This state of things leads, not only inAmerica but in all large States, to something of the weariness anddiscouragement that we associate with the Roman Empire. Modern States,as opposed to the small city States of ancient Greece or medievalItaly, leave little room for initiative, and fail to develop in mostmen any sense of ability to control their political destinies. Thefew men who achieve power in such States are men of abnormal ambitionand thirst for dominion, combined with skill in cajolery and subtletyin negotiation. All the rest are dwarfed by knowledge of their ownimpotence.A curious survival from the old monarchical idea of the State is thebelief that there is some peculiar wickedness in a wish to secedeon the part of any section of the population. If Ireland or Polanddesires independence, it is thought obvious that this desire must bestrenuously resisted, and any attempt to secure it is condemned as“high treason.” The only instance to the contrary that I can rememberis the separation of Norway and Sweden, which was commended but notimitated. In other cases, nothing but defeat in war has induced Statesto part with territory: although this attitude is taken for granted, itis not one which would be adopted if the State had better ends in view.The reason for its adoption is that the chief end of almost all greatStates is power, especially power in war. And power in war is oftenincreased by the inclusion of unwilling citizens. If the well-beingof the citizens were the end in view, the question whether a certainarea should be included, or should form a separate State, would be leftfreely to the decision of that area. If this principle were adopted,one of the main reasons for war would be obviated, and one of the mosttyrannical elements in the State would be removed.The principal source of the harm done by the State is the fact thatpower is its chief end. This is not the case in America, becauseAmerica is safe against aggression;[8] but in all other great nationsthe chief aim of the State is to possess the greatest possibleamount of external force. To this end, the liberty of the citizensis curtailed, and anti-militarist propaganda is severely punished.This attitude is rooted in pride and fear: pride, which refuses tobe conciliatory, and fear, which dreads the results of foreign prideconflicting with our own pride. It seems something of a historicalaccident that these two passions, which by no means exhaust thepolitical passions of the ordinary man, should so completely determinethe external policy of the State. Without pride, there would be nooccasion for fear: fear on the part of one nation is due to thesupposed pride of another nation. Pride of dominion, unwillingness todecide disputes otherwise than by force or the threat of force, is ahabit of mind greatly encouraged by the possession of power. Thosewho have long been in the habit of exercising power become autocraticand quarrelsome, incapable of regarding an equal otherwise than as arival. It is notorious that head masters’ conferences are more liableto violent disagreements than most similar bodies: each head mastertries to treat the others as he treats his own boys; they resent suchtreatment, and he resents their resentment. Men who have the habitof authority are peculiarly unfit for friendly negotiation; but theofficial relations of States are mainly in the hands of men with agreat deal of authority in their own country. This is, of course, moreparticularly the case where there is a monarch who actually governs.If is less true where there is a governing oligarchy, and still lesstrue where there is some approach to real democracy. But it is true toa considerable extent in all countries, because Prime Ministers andForeign Secretaries are necessarily men in authority. The first steptowards remedying this state of things is a genuine interest in foreignaffairs on the part of the ordinary citizen, and an insistence thatnational pride shall not be allowed to jeopardize his other interests.During war, when he is roused, he is willing to sacrifice everythingto pride; but in quiet times he will be far more ready than men inauthority to realize that foreign affairs, like private concerns, oughtto be settled amicably according to principles, not brutally by forceor the threat of force.The effect of personal bias in the men who actually compose theGovernment may be seen very clearly in labor disputes. Frenchsyndicalists affirm that the State is simply a product of capitalism, apart of the weapons which capital employs in its conflict with labor.Even in democratic States there is much to bear out this view. Instrikes it is common to order out the soldiers to coerce the strikers;although the employers are much fewer, and much easier to coerce,the soldiers are never employed against them. When labor troublesparalyze the industry of a country, it is the men who are thought to beunpatriotic, not the masters, though clearly the responsibility belongsto both sides. The chief reason for this attitude on the part ofGovernments is that the men composing them belong, by their success ifnot by their origin, to the same class as the great employers of labor.Their bias and their associates combine to make them view strikesand lockouts from the standpoint of the rich. In a democracy publicopinion and the need of conciliating political supporters partiallycorrect these plutocratic influences, but the correction is always onlypartial. And the same influences which warp the views of Governmentson labor questions also warp their views on foreign affairs, with theadded disadvantage that the ordinary citizen has much fewer means ofarriving at an independent judgment.The excessive power of the State, partly through internal oppression,but principally through war and the fear of war, is one of the chiefcauses of misery in the modern world, and one of the main reasons forthe discouragement which prevents men from growing to their full mentalstature. Some means of curing this excessive power must be found if menare not to be organized into despair, as they were in the Roman Empire.The State has one purpose which is on the whole good, namely, thesubstitution of law for force in the relations of men. But thispurpose can only be fully achieved by a world-State, without whichinternational relations cannot be made subject to law. And althoughlaw is better than force, law is still not the best way of settlingdisputes. Law is too static, too much on the side of what is decaying,too little on the side of what is growing. So long as law is in theorysupreme, it will have to be tempered, from time to time, by internalrevolution and external war. These can only be prevented by perpetualreadiness to alter the law in accordance with the present balance offorces. If this is not done, the motives for appealing to force willsooner or later become irresistible. A world-State or federation ofStates, if it is to be successful, will have to decide questions, notby the legal maxims which would be applied by the Hague tribunal, butas far as possible in the same sense in which they would be decided bywar. The function of authority should be to render the appeal to forceunnecessary, not to give decisions contrary to those which would bereached by force.This view may be thought by some to be immoral. It may be said that theobject of civilization should be to secure justice, not to give thevictory to the strong. But when this antithesis is allowed to pass,it is forgotten that love of justice may itself set force in motion.A Legislature which wishes to decide an issue in the same way as itwould be decided if there were an appeal to force will necessarily takeaccount of justice, provided justice is so flagrantly on one side thatdisinterested parties are willing to take up the quarrel. If a strongman assaults a weak man in the streets of London, the balance of forceis on the side of the weak man, because, even if the police did notappear, casual passers-by would step in to defend him. It is sheer cantto speak of a contest of might against right, and at the same time tohope for a victory of the right. If the contest is really between mightand right, that _means_ that right will be beaten. What is obscurelyintended, when this phrase is used, is that the stronger side is onlyrendered stronger by men’s sense of right. But men’s sense of right isvery subjective, and is only one factor in deciding the preponderanceof force. What is desirable in a Legislature is, not that it shoulddecide by its personal sense of right, but that it should decide in away which is felt to make an appeal to force unnecessary.Having considered what the State ought not to do, I come now to what itought to do.Apart from war and the preservation of internal order, there arecertain more positive functions which the State performs, and certainothers which it ought to perform.We may lay down two principles as regards these positive functions.First: there are matters in which the welfare of the whole communitydepends upon the practically universal attainment of a certain minimum;in such cases the State has the right to insist upon this minimum beingattained.Secondly: there are ways in which, by insisting upon the maintenance oflaw, the State, if it does nothing further, renders possible variousforms of injustice which would otherwise be prevented by the angerof their victims. Such injustices ought, as far as possible, to beprevented by the State.The most obvious example of a matter where the general welfaredepends upon a universal minimum is sanitation and the prevention ofinfectious diseases. A single case of plague, if it is neglected, maycause disaster to a whole community. No one can reasonably maintain,on general grounds of liberty, that a man suffering from plague oughtto be left free to spread infection far and wide. Exactly similarconsiderations apply to drainage, notification of fevers, and kindredmatters. The interference with liberty remains an evil, but in somecases it is clearly a smaller evil than the spread of disease whichliberty would produce. The stamping out of malaria and yellow fever bydestroying mosquitoes is perhaps the most striking example of the goodwhich can be done in this way. But when the good is small or doubtful,and the interference with liberty is great, it becomes better to endurea certain amount of preventable disease rather than suffer a scientifictyranny.Compulsory education comes under the same head as sanitation. Theexistence of ignorant masses in a population is a danger to thecommunity; when a considerable percentage are illiterate, the wholemachinery of government has to take account of the fact. Democracy inits modern form would be quite impossible in a nation where many mencannot read. But in this case there is not the same need of absoluteuniversality as in the case of sanitary measures. The gipsies, whosemode of life has been rendered almost impossible by the educationauthorities, might well have been allowed to remain a picturesqueexception. But apart from such rather unimportant exceptions, theargument for compulsory education is irresistible.What the State does for the care of children at present is less thanwhat ought to be done, not more. Children are not capable of lookingafter their own interests, and parental responsibility is in manyways inadequate. It is clear that the State alone can insist upon thechildren being provided with the minimum of knowledge and health which,for the time being, satisfies the conscience of the community.The encouragement of scientific research is another matter whichcomes rightly within the powers of the State, because the benefits ofdiscoveries accrue to the community, while the investigations areexpensive and never individually certain of achieving any result. Inthis matter, Great Britain lags behind all other civilized countries.The second kind of powers which the State ought to possess are thosethat aim at diminishing economic injustice. It is this kind thathas been emphasized by socialists. The law creates or facilitatesmonopolies, and monopolies are able to exact a toll from the community.The most glaring example is the private ownership of land. Railwaysare at present controlled by the State, since rates are fixed by law;and it is clear that if they were uncontrolled, they would acquire adangerous degree of power.[9] Such considerations, if they stood alone,would justify complete socialism. But I think justice, by itself, is,like law, too static to be made a supreme political principle: it doesnot, when it has been achieved, contain any seeds of new life or anyimpetus to development. For this reason, when we wish to remedy aninjustice, it is important to consider whether, in so doing, we shallbe destroying the incentive to some form of vigorous action which ison the whole useful to the community. No such form of action, so far asI can see, is associated with private ownership of land or of any othersource of economic rent; if this is the case, it follows that the Stateought to be the primary recipient of rent.If all these powers are allowed to the State, what becomes of theattempt to rescue individual liberty from its tyranny?This is part of the general problem which confronts all those who stillcare for the ideals which inspired liberalism, namely the problem ofcombining liberty and personal initiative with organization. Politicsand economics are more and more dominated by vast organizations, inface of which the individual is in danger of becoming powerless. TheState is the greatest of these organizations, and the most seriousmenace to liberty. And yet it seems that many of its functions must beextended rather than curtailed.There is one way by which organization and liberty can be combined, andthat is, by securing power for voluntary organizations, consisting ofmen who have chosen to belong to them because they embody some purposewhich all their members consider important, not a purpose imposed byaccident or outside force. The State, being geographical, cannot be awholly voluntary association, but for that very reason there is needof a strong public opinion to restrain it from a tyrannical use of itspowers. This public opinion, in most matters, can only be secured bycombinations of those who have certain interests or desires in common.The positive purposes of the State, over and above the preservationof order, ought as far as possible to be carried out, not by theState itself, but by independent organizations, which should be leftcompletely free so long as they satisfied the State that they werenot falling below a necessary minimum. This occurs to a certainlimited extent at present in regard to elementary education. Theuniversities, also, may be regarded as acting for the State in thematter of higher education and research, except that in their case nominimum of achievement is exacted. In the economic sphere, the Stateought to exercise control, but ought to leave initiative to others.There is every reason to multiply opportunities of initiative, and togive the greatest possible share of initiative to each individual,for if this is not done there will be a general sense of impotenceand discouragement. There ought to be a constant endeavor to leavethe more positive aspects of government in the hands of voluntaryorganizations, the purpose of the State being merely to exactefficiency and to secure an amicable settlement of disputes, whetherwithin or without its own borders. And with this ought to be combinedthe greatest possible toleration of exceptions and the least possibleinsistence upon uniform system.A good deal may be achieved through local government by trades aswell as by areas. This is the most original idea in syndicalism, andit is valuable as a check upon the tyranny which the community may betempted to exercise over certain classes of its members. All strongorganizations which embody a sectional public opinion, such as tradeunions, coöperative societies, professions, and universities, are to bewelcomed as safeguards of liberty and opportunities for initiative. Andthere is need of a strong public opinion in favor of liberty itself.The old battles for freedom of thought and freedom of speech, which itwas thought had been definitively won, will have to be fought all overagain, since most men are only willing to accord freedom to opinionswhich happen to be popular. Institutions cannot preserve libertyunless men realize that liberty is precious and are willing to exertthemselves to keep it alive.There is a traditional objection to every _imperium in imperio_, butthis is only the jealousy of the tyrant. In actual fact, the modernState contains many organizations which it cannot defeat, exceptperhaps on rare occasions when public opinion is roused against them.Mr. Lloyd George’s long fight with the medical profession over theInsurance Act was full of Homeric fluctuations of fortune. The Welshminers recently routed the whole power of the State, backed by anexcited nation. As for the financiers, no Government would dreamof a conflict with them. When all other classes are exhorted topatriotism, they are allowed their 4? per cent. and an increase ofinterest on their consols. It is well understood on all sides that anappeal to _their_ patriotism would show gross ignorance of the world.It is against the traditions of the State to extort their money bythreatening to withdraw police protection. This is not due to thedifficulty of such a measure, but only to the fact that great wealthwins genuine admiration from us all, and we cannot bear to think of avery rich man being treated with disrespect.The existence of strong organizations within the State, such astrade unions, is not undesirable except from the point of view ofthe official who wishes to wield unlimited power, or of the rivalorganizations, such as federations of employers, which would prefer adisorganized adversary. In view of the vastness of the State, most mencan find little political outlet for initiative except in subordinateorganizations formed for specific purposes. Without an outlet forpolitical initiative, men lose their social vigor and their interestin public affairs: they become a prey to corrupt wire-pullers, or tosensation-mongers who have the art of capturing a tired and vagrantattention. The cure for this is to increase rather than diminish thepowers of voluntary organizations, to give every man a sphere ofpolitical activity small enough for his interest and his capacity,and to confine the functions of the State, as far as possible, to themaintenance of peace among rival interests. The essential merit ofthe State is that it prevents the internal use of force by privatepersons. Its essential demerits are, that it promotes the externaluse of force, and that, by its great size, it makes each individualfeel impotent even in a democracy. I shall return in a later lectureto the question of preventing war. The prevention of the sense ofindividual impotence cannot be achieved by a return to the small CityState, which would be as reactionary as a return to the days beforemachinery. It must be achieved by a method which is in the direction ofpresent tendencies. Such a method would be the increasing devolution ofpositive political initiative to bodies formed voluntarily for specificpurposes, leaving the State rather in the position of a federalauthority or a court of arbitration. The State will then confine itselfto insisting upon _some_ settlement of rival interests: its onlyprinciple in deciding what is the right settlement will be an attemptto find the measure most acceptable, on the whole, to all the partiesconcerned. This is the direction in which democratic States naturallytend, except in so far as they are turned aside by war or the fear ofwar. So long as war remains a daily imminent danger, the State willremain a Moloch, sacrificing sometimes the life of the individual, andalways his unfettered development, to the barren struggle for masteryin the competition with other States. In internal as in externalaffairs, the worst enemy of freedom is war.