No political theory is adequate unless it is applicable to children aswell as to men and women. Theorists are mostly childless, or, if theyhave children, they are carefully screened from the disturbances whichwould be caused by youthful turmoil. Some of them have written books oneducation, but without, as a rule, having any actual children presentto their minds while they wrote. Those educational theorists who havehad a knowledge of children, such as the inventors of Kindergarten andthe Montessori system,[14] have not always had enough realization ofthe ultimate goal of education to be able to deal successfully withadvanced instruction. I have not the knowledge either of children orof education which would enable me to supply whatever defects theremay be in the writings of others. But some questions, concerningeducation as a political institution, are involved in any hope ofsocial reconstruction, and are not usually considered by writers oneducational theory. It is these questions that I wish to discuss.The power of education in forming character and opinion is verygreat and very generally recognized. The genuine beliefs, though notusually the professed precepts, of parents and teachers are almostunconsciously acquired by most children; and even if they departfrom these beliefs in later life, something of them remains deeplyimplanted, ready to emerge in a time of stress or crisis. Education is,as a rule, the strongest force on the side of what exists and againstfundamental change: threatened institutions, while they are stillpowerful, possess themselves of the educational machine, and instil arespect for their own excellence into the malleable minds of the young.Reformers retort by trying to oust their opponents from their positionof vantage. The children themselves are not considered by either party;they are merely so much material, to be recruited into one army or theother. If the children themselves were considered, education would notaim at making them belong to this party or that, but at enabling themto choose intelligently between the parties; it would aim at makingthem able to think, not at making them think what their teachers think.Education as a political weapon could not exist if we respected therights of children. If we respected the rights of children, we shouldeducate them so as to give them the knowledge and the mental habitsrequired for forming independent opinions; but education as a politicalinstitution endeavors to form habits and to circumscribe knowledge insuch a way as to make one set of opinions inevitable.The two principles of _justice_ and _liberty_, which cover a very greatdeal of the social reconstruction required, are not by themselvessufficient where education is concerned. Justice, in the literal senseof equal rights, is obviously not wholly possible as regards children.And as for liberty, it is, to begin with, essentially negative: itcondemns all avoidable interference with freedom, without giving apositive principle of construction. But education is essentiallyconstructive, and requires some positive conception of what constitutesa good life. And although liberty is to be respected in education asmuch as is compatible with instruction, and although a very greatdeal more liberty than is customary can be allowed without loss toinstruction, yet it is clear that some departure from complete libertyis unavoidable if children are to be taught anything, except in thecase of unusually intelligent children who are kept isolated from morenormal companions. This is one reason for the great responsibilitywhich rests upon teachers: the children must, necessarily, be moreor less at the mercy of their elders, and cannot make themselvesthe guardians of their own interests. Authority in education is tosome extent unavoidable, and those who educate have to find a way ofexercising authority in accordance with the _spirit_ of liberty.Where authority is unavoidable, what is needed is _reverence_. A manwho is to educate really well, and is to make the young grow anddevelop into their full stature, must be filled through and throughwith the spirit of reverence. It is reverence towards others thatis lacking in those who advocate machine-made cast-iron systems:militarism, capitalism, Fabian scientific organization, and all theother prisons into which reformers and reactionaries try to forcethe human spirit. In education, with its codes of rules emanatingfrom a Government office, its large classes and fixed curriculum andoverworked teachers, its determination to produce a dead level of glibmediocrity, the lack of reverence for the child is all but universal.Reverence requires imagination and vital warmth; it requires mostimagination in respect of those who have least actual achievement orpower. The child is weak and superficially foolish, the teacher isstrong, and in an every-day sense wiser than the child. The teacherwithout reverence, or the bureaucrat without reverence, easily despisesthe child for these outward inferiorities. He thinks it is his dutyto “mold” the child: in imagination he is the potter with the clay.And so he gives to the child some unnatural shape, which hardens withage, producing strains and spiritual dissatisfactions, out of whichgrow cruelty and envy, and the belief that others must be compelled toundergo the same distortions.Tho man who has reverence will not think it his duty to “mold” theyoung. He feels in all that lives, but especially in human beings, andmost of all in children, something sacred, indefinable, unlimited,something individual and strangely precious, the growing principle oflife, an embodied fragment of the dumb striving of the world. In thepresence of a child he feels an unaccountable humility—a humility noteasily defensible on any rational ground, and yet somehow nearer towisdom than the easy self-confidence of many parents and teachers. Theoutward helplessness of the child and the appeal of dependence make himconscious of the responsibility of a trust. His imagination shows himwhat the child may become, for good or evil, how its impulses may bedeveloped or thwarted, how its hopes must be dimmed and the life in itgrow less living, how its trust will be bruised and its quick desiresreplaced by brooding will. All this gives him a longing to help thechild in its own battle; he would equip and strengthen it, not for someoutside end proposed by the State or by any other impersonal authority,but for the ends which the child’s own spirit is obscurely seeking.The man who feels this can wield the authority of an educator withoutinfringing the principle of liberty.It is not in a spirit of reverence that education is conducted byStates and Churches and the great institutions that are subservient tothem. What is considered in education is hardly ever the boy or girl,the young man or young woman, but almost always, in some form, themaintenance of the existing order. When the individual is considered,it is almost exclusively with a view to worldly success—making moneyor achieving a good position. To be ordinary, and to acquire the artof getting on, is the ideal which is set before the youthful mind,except by a few rare teachers who have enough energy of belief to breakthrough the system within which they are expected to work. Almost alleducation has a political motive: it aims at strengthening some group,national or religious or even social, in the competition with othergroups. It is this motive, in the main, which determines the subjectstaught, the knowledge offered and the knowledge withheld, and alsodecides what mental habits the pupils are expected to acquire. Hardlyanything is done to foster the inward growth of mind and spirit; infact, those who have had most education are very often atrophied intheir mental and spiritual life, devoid of impulse, and possessing onlycertain mechanical aptitudes which take the place of living thought.Some of the things which education achieves at present must continue tobe achieved by education in any civilized country. All children mustcontinue to be taught how to read and write, and some must continueto acquire the knowledge needed for such professions as medicine orlaw or engineering. The higher education required for the sciencesand the arts is necessary for those to whom it is suited. Except inhistory and religion and kindred matters, the actual instruction isonly inadequate, not positively harmful. The instruction might be givenin a more liberal spirit, with more attempt to show its ultimate uses;and of course much of it is traditional and dead. But in the main it isnecessary, and would have to form a part of any educational system.It is in history and religion and other controversial subjects thatthe actual instruction is positively harmful. These subjects touch theinterests by which schools are maintained; and the interests maintainthe schools in order that certain views on these subjects may beinstilled. History, in every country, is so taught as to magnify thatcountry: children learn to believe that their own country has alwaysbeen in the right and almost always victorious, that it has producedalmost all the great men, and that it is in all respects superior toall other countries. Since these beliefs are flattering, they areeasily absorbed, and hardly ever dislodged from instinct by laterknowledge.To take a simple and almost trivial example: the facts about the battleof Waterloo are known in great detail and with minute accuracy; butthe facts as taught in elementary schools will be widely different inEngland, France, and Germany. The ordinary English boy imagines thatthe Prussians played hardly any part; the ordinary German boy imaginesthat Wellington was practically defeated when the day was retrievedby Blücher’s gallantry. If the facts were taught accurately in bothcountries, national pride would not be fostered to the same extent,neither nation would feel so certain of victory in the event of war,and the willingness to fight would be diminished. It is this resultwhich has to be prevented. Every State wishes to promote nationalpride, and is conscious that this cannot be done by unbiased history.The defenseless children are taught by distortions and suppressions andsuggestions. The false ideas as to the history of the world which aretaught in the various countries are of a kind which encourages strifeand serves to keep alive a bigoted nationalism. If good relationsbetween States were desired, one of the first steps ought to be tosubmit all teaching of history to an international commission, whichshould produce neutral textbooks free from the patriotic bias which isnow demanded everywhere.[15]Exactly the same thing applies to religion. Elementary schools arepractically always in the hands either of some religious body or of aState which has a certain attitude towards religion. A religious bodyexists through the fact that its members all have certain definitebeliefs on subjects as to which the truth is not ascertainable. Schoolsconducted by religious bodies have to prevent the young, who are ofteninquiring by nature, from discovering that these definite beliefs areopposed by others which are no more unreasonable, and that many of themen best qualified to judge think that there is no good evidence infavor of any definite belief. When the State is militantly secular, asin France, State schools become as dogmatic as those that are in thehands of the Churches (I understand that the word “God” must not bementioned in a French elementary school). The result in all these casesis the same: free inquiry is checked, and on the most important matterin the world the child is met with dogma or with stony silence.It is not only in elementary education that these evils exist. In moreadvanced education they take subtler forms, and there is more attemptto conceal them, but they are still present. Eton and Oxford set acertain stamp upon a man’s mind, just as a Jesuit College does. Itcan hardly be said that Eton and Oxford have a _conscious_ purpose,but they have a purpose which is none the less strong and effectivefor not being formulated. In almost all who have been through themthey produce a worship of “good form,” which is as destructive to lifeand thought as the medieval Church. “Good form” is quite compatiblewith a superficial open-mindedness, a readiness to hear all sides,and a certain urbanity towards opponents. But it is not compatiblewith fundamental open-mindedness, or with any inward readiness to giveweight to the other side. Its essence is the assumption that whatis most important is a certain kind of behavior, a behavior whichminimizes friction between equals and delicately impresses inferiorswith a conviction of their own crudity. As a political weapon forpreserving the privileges of the rich in a snobbish democracy it isunsurpassable. As a means of producing an agreeable social _milieu_ forthose who have money with no strong beliefs or unusual desires it hassome merit. In every other respect it is abominable.The evils of “good form” arise from two sources: its perfect assuranceof its own rightness, and its belief that correct manners are more tobe desired than intellect, or artistic creation, or vital energy, orany of the other sources of progress in the world. Perfect assurance,by itself, is enough to destroy all mental progress in those who haveit. And when it is combined with contempt for the angularities andawkwardnesses that are almost invariably associated with great mentalpower, it becomes a source of destruction to all who come in contactwith it. “Good form” is itself dead and incapable of growth; and by itsattitude to those who are without it it spreads its own death to manywho might otherwise have life. The harm which it has done to well-to-doEnglishmen, and to men whose abilities have led the well-to-do tonotice them, is incalculable.The prevention of free inquiry is unavoidable so long as the purposeof education is to produce belief rather than thought, to compel theyoung to hold positive opinions on doubtful matters rather than tolet them see the doubtfulness and be encouraged to independence ofmind. Education ought to foster the wish for truth, not the convictionthat some particular creed is the truth. But it is creeds that holdmen together in fighting organizations: Churches, States, politicalparties. It is intensity of belief in a creed that produces efficiencyin fighting: victory comes to those who feel the strongest certaintyabout matters on which doubt is the only rational attitude. To producethis intensity of belief and this efficiency in fighting, the child’snature is warped, and its free outlook is cramped, by cultivatinginhibitions as a check to the growth of new ideas. In those whoseminds are not very active the result is the omnipotence of prejudice;while the few whose thought cannot be wholly killed become cynical,intellectually hopeless, destructively critical, able to make allthat is living seem foolish, unable themselves to supply the creativeimpulses which they destroy in others.The success in fighting which is achieved by suppressing freedom ofthought is brief and very worthless. In the long run mental vigor isas essential to success as it is to a good life. The conception ofeducation as a form of drill, a means of producing unanimity throughslavishness, is very common, and is defended chiefly on the groundthat it leads to victory. Those who enjoy parallels from ancienthistory will point to the victory of Sparta over Athens to enforcetheir moral. But it is Athens that has had power over men’s thoughtsand imaginations, not Sparta: any one of us, if we could be born againinto some past epoch, would rather be born an Athenian than a Spartan.And in the modern world so much intellect is required in practicalaffairs that even the external victory is more likely to be won byintelligence than by docility. Education in credulity leads by quickstages to mental decay; it is only by keeping alive the spirit of freeinquiry that the indispensable minimum of progress can be achieved.Certain mental habits are commonly instilled by those who are engagedin educating: obedience and discipline, ruthlessness in the strugglefor worldly success, contempt towards opposing groups, and anunquestioning credulity, a passive acceptance of the teacher’s wisdom.All these habits are against life. Instead of obedience and discipline,we ought to aim at preserving independence and impulse. Instead ofruthlessness, education should try to develop justice in thought.Instead of contempt, it ought to instil reverence, and the attempt atunderstanding; towards the opinions of others it ought to produce, notnecessarily acquiescence, but only such opposition as is combined withimaginative apprehension and a clear realization of the grounds foropposition. Instead of credulity, the object should be to stimulateconstructive doubt, the love of mental adventure, the sense of worldsto conquer by enterprise and boldness in thought. Contentment with the_status quo_, and subordination of the individual pupil to politicalaims, owing to the indifference to the things of the mind, are theimmediate causes of these evils; but beneath these causes there is onemore fundamental, the fact that education is treated as a means ofacquiring power over the pupil, not as a means of nourishing his owngrowth. It is in this that lack of reverence shows itself; and it isonly by more reverence that a fundamental reform can be effected.Obedience and discipline are supposed to be indispensable if order isto be kept in a class, and if any instruction is to be given. To someextent this is true; but the extent is much less than it is thoughtto be by those who regard obedience and discipline as in themselvesdesirable. Obedience, the yielding of one’s will to outside direction,is the counterpart of authority. Both may be necessary in certaincases. Refractory children, lunatics, and criminals may requireauthority, and may need to be forced to obey. But in so far as this isnecessary it is a misfortune: what is to be desired is the free choiceof ends with which it is not necessary to interfere. And educationalreformers have shown that this is far more possible than our fatherswould ever have believed.[16]What makes obedience seem necessary in schools is the large classesand overworked teachers demanded by a false economy. Those who have noexperience of teaching are incapable of imagining the expense of spiritentailed by any really living instruction. They think that teachers canreasonably be expected to work as many hours as bank clerks. Intensefatigue and irritable nerves are the result, and an absolute necessityof performing the day’s task mechanically. But the task cannot beperformed mechanically except by exacting obedience.If we took education seriously, and thought it as important to keepalive the minds of children as to secure victory in war, we shouldconduct education quite differently: we should make sure of achievingthe end, even if the expense were a hundredfold greater than it is. Tomany men and women a small amount of teaching is a delight, and can bedone with a fresh zest and life which keeps most pupils interestedwithout any need of discipline. The few who do not become interestedmight be separated from the rest, and given a different kind ofinstruction. A teacher ought to have only as much teaching as can bedone, on most days, with actual pleasure in the work, and with anawareness of the pupil’s mental needs. The result would be a relationof friendliness instead of hostility between teacher and pupil, arealization on the part of most pupils that education serves to developtheir own lives and is not merely an outside imposition, interferingwith play and demanding many hours of sitting still. All that isnecessary to this end is a (greater expenditure of money), to secureteachers with more leisure and with a natural love of teaching.Discipline, as it exists in schools, is very largely an evil. There isa kind of discipline which is necessary to almost all achievement, andwhich perhaps is not sufficiently valued by those who react against thepurely external discipline of traditional methods. The desirable kindof discipline is the kind that comes from within, which consists in thepower of pursuing a distant object steadily, foregoing and sufferingmany things on the way. This involves the subordination of impulseto will, the power of a directing action by large creative desireseven at moments when they are not vividly alive. Without this, noserious ambition, good or bad, can be realized, no consistent purposecan dominate. This kind of discipline is very necessary, but can onlyresult from strong desires for ends not immediately attainable, and canonly be produced by education if education fosters such desires, whichit seldom does at present. Such discipline springs from one’s own will,not from outside authority. It is not this kind which is sought in mostschools, and it is not this kind which seems to me an evil.Although elementary education encourages the undesirable disciplinethat consists in passive obedience, and although hardly any existingeducation encourages the moral discipline of consistent self-direction,there is a certain kind of purely mental discipline which is producedby the traditional higher education. The kind I mean is that whichenables a man to concentrate his thoughts at will upon any matterthat he has occasion to consider, regardless of preoccupations orboredom or intellectual difficulty. This quality, though it has noimportant intrinsic excellence, greatly enhances the efficiency ofthe mind as an instrument. It is this that enables a lawyer to masterthe scientific details of a patent case which he forgets as soon asjudgment has been given, or a civil servant to deal quickly withmany different administrative questions in succession. It is thisthat enables men to forget private cares during business hours. In acomplicated world it is a very necessary faculty for those whose workrequires mental concentration.Success in producing mental discipline is the chief merit oftraditional higher education. I doubt whether it can be achieved exceptby compelling or persuading active attention to a prescribed task. Itis for this reason chiefly that I do not believe methods such as MadameMontessori’s applicable when the age of childhood has been passed.The essence of her method consists in giving a choice of occupations,any one of which is interesting to most children, and all of whichare instructive. The child’s attention is wholly spontaneous, as inplay; it enjoys acquiring knowledge in this way, and does not acquireany knowledge which it does not desire. I am convinced that this isthe best method of education with young children: the actual resultsmake it almost impossible to think otherwise. But it is difficultto see how this method can lead to control of attention by the will.Many things which must be thought about are uninteresting, and eventhose that are interesting at first often become very wearisome beforethey have been considered as long as is necessary. The power of givingprolonged attention is very important, and it is hardly to be widelyacquired except as a habit induced originally by outside pressure. Somefew boys, it is true, have sufficiently strong intellectual desires tobe willing to undergo all that is necessary by their own initiativeand free will; but for all others an external inducement is requiredin order to make them learn any subject thoroughly. There is amongeducational reformers a certain fear of demanding great efforts, andin the world at large a growing unwillingness to be bored. Both thesetendencies have their good sides, but both also have their dangers. Themental discipline which is jeopardized can be preserved by mere advicewithout external compulsion whenever a boy’s intellectual interest andambition can be sufficiently stimulated. A good teacher ought to beable to do this for any boy who is capable of much mental achievement;and for many of the others the present purely bookish education isprobably not the best. In this way, so long as the importance of mentaldiscipline is realized, it can probably be attained, whenever it isattainable, by appealing to the pupil’s consciousness of his own needs.So long as teachers are not expected to succeed by this method, it iseasy for them to slip into a slothful dullness, and blame their pupilswhen the fault is really their own.Ruthlessness in the economic struggle will almost unavoidably betaught in schools so long as the economic structure of society remainsunchanged. This must be particularly the case in middle-class schools,which depend for their numbers upon the good opinion of parents, andsecure the good opinion of parents by advertising the successes ofpupils. This is one of many ways in which the competitive organizationof the State is harmful. Spontaneous and disinterested desire forknowledge is not at all uncommon in the young, and might be easilyaroused in many in whom it remains latent. But it is remorselesslychecked by teachers who think only of examinations, diplomas, anddegrees. For the abler boys there is no time for thought, no timefor the indulgence of intellectual taste, from the moment of firstgoing to school until the moment of leaving the university. From firstto last there is nothing but one long drudgery of examination tipsand textbook facts. The most intelligent, at the end, are disgustedwith learning, longing only to forget it and to escape into a lifeof action. Yet there, as before, the economic machine holds themprisoners, and all their spontaneous desires are bruised and thwarted.The examination system, and the fact that instruction is treated mainlyas training for a livelihood, leads the young to regard knowledge, froma purely utilitarian point of view, as the road to money, not as thegateway to wisdom. This would not matter so much if it affected onlythose who have no genuine intellectual interests. But unfortunately itaffects most those whose intellectual interests are strongest, sinceit is upon them that the pressure of examinations falls with mostseverity. To them most, but to all in some degree, education appears asa means of acquiring superiority over others; it is infected throughand through with ruthlessness and glorification of social inequality.Any free, disinterested consideration shows that, whatever inequalitiesmight remain in a Utopia, the actual inequalities are almost allcontrary to justice. But our educational system tends to conceal thisfrom all except the failures, since those who succeed are on the way toprofit by the inequalities, with every encouragement from the men whohave directed their education.Passive acceptance of the teacher’s wisdom is easy to most boys andgirls. It involves no effort of independent thought, and seems rationalbecause the teacher knows more than his pupils; it is moreover theway to win the favor of the teacher unless he is a very exceptionalman. Yet the habit of passive acceptance is a disastrous one in laterlife. It causes men to seek a leader, and to accept as a leader whoeveris established in that position. It makes the power of Churches,Governments, party caucuses, and all the other organizations by whichplain men are misled into supporting old systems which are harmfulto the nation and to themselves. It is possible that there would notbe much independence of thought even if education did everythingto promote it; but there would certainly be more than there is atpresent. If the object were to make pupils think, rather than to makethem accept certain conclusions, education would be conducted quitedifferently: there would be less rapidity of instruction and morediscussion, more occasions when pupils were encouraged to expressthemselves, more attempt to make education concern itself with mattersin which the pupils felt some interest.Above all, there would be an endeavor to rouse and stimulate thelove of mental adventure. The world in which we live is various andastonishing: some of the things that seem plainest grow more and moredifficult the more they are considered; other things, which might havebeen thought quite impossible to discover, have nevertheless been laidbare by genius and industry. The powers of thought, the vast regionswhich it can master, the much more vast regions which it can only dimlysuggest to imagination, give to those whose minds have traveled beyondthe daily round an amazing richness of material, an escape from thetriviality and wearisomeness of familiar routine, by which the whole oflife is filled with interest, and the prison walls of the commonplaceare broken down. The same love of adventure which takes men to theSouth Pole, the same passion for a conclusive trial of strength whichleads some men to welcome war, can find in creative thought an outletwhich is neither wasteful nor cruel, but increases the dignity of manby incarnating in life some of that shining splendor which the humanspirit is bringing down out of the unknown. To give this joy, in agreater or less measure, to all who are capable of it, is the supremeend for which the education of the mind is to be valued.It will be said that the joy of mental adventure must be rare, thatthere are few who can appreciate it, and that ordinary education cantake no account of so aristocratic a good. I do not believe this. Thejoy of mental adventure is far commoner in the young than in grownmen and women. Among children it is very common, and grows naturallyout of the period of make-believe and fancy. It is rare in later lifebecause everything is done to kill it during education. Men fearthought as they fear nothing else on earth—more than ruin, more eventhan death. Thought is subversive and revolutionary, destructive andterrible; thought is merciless to privilege, established institutions,and comfortable habits; thought is anarchic and lawless, indifferentto authority, careless of the well-tried wisdom of the ages. Thoughtlooks into the pit of hell and is not afraid. It sees man, a feeblespeck, surrounded by unfathomable depths of silence; yet it bearsitself proudly, as unmoved as if it were lord of the universe. Thoughtis great and swift and free, the light of the world, and the chiefglory of man.But if thought is to become the possession of many, not the privilegeof the few, we must have done with fear. It is fear that holds menback—fear lest their cherished beliefs should prove delusions, fearlest the institutions by which they live should prove harmful, fearlest they themselves should prove less worthy of respect than theyhave supposed themselves to be. “Should the working man think freelyabout property? Then what will become of us, the rich? Should youngmen and young women think freely about sex? Then what will becomeof morality? Should soldiers think freely about war? Then what willbecome of military discipline? Away with thought! Back into the shadesof prejudice, lest property, morals, and war should be endangered!Better men should be stupid, slothful, and oppressive than that theirthoughts should be free. For if their thoughts were free they mightnot think as we do. And at all costs this disaster must be averted.”So the opponents of thought argue in the unconscious depths of theirsouls. And so they act in their churches, their schools, and theiruniversities.No institution inspired by fear can further life. Hope, not fear, isthe creative principle in human affairs. All that has made man greathas sprung from the attempt to secure what is good, not from thestruggle to avert what was thought evil. It is because modern educationis so seldom inspired by a great hope that it so seldom achieves agreat result. The wish to preserve the past rather than the hope ofcreating the future dominates the minds of those who control theteaching of the young. Education should not aim at a passive awarenessof dead facts, but at an activity directed towards the world thatour efforts are to create. It should be inspired, not by a regretfulhankering after the extinct beauties of Greece and the Renaissance,but by a shining vision of the society that is to be, of the triumphsthat thought will achieve in the time to come, and of the ever-wideninghorizon of man’s survey over the universe. Those who are taught in thisspirit will be filled with life and hope and joy, able to bear theirpart in bringing to mankind a future less somber than the past, withfaith in the glory that human effort can create.