Among the many gloomy novelists of the realistic school, perhaps themost full of gloom is Gissing. In common with all his characters, helives under the weight of a great oppression: the power of the fearfuland yet adored idol of Money. One of his typical stories is “Eve’sRansom,” where the heroine, with various discreditable subterfuges,throws over the poor man whom she loves in order to marry the rich manwhose income she loves still better. The poor man, finding that therich man’s income has given her a fuller life and a better characterthan the poor man’s love could have given her, decides that she hasdone quite right, and that he deserves to be punished for his lack ofmoney. In this story, as in his other books, Gissing has set forth,quite accurately, the actual dominion of money, and the impersonalworship which it exacts from the great majority of civilized mankind.Gissing’s facts are undeniable, and yet his attitude produces a revoltin any reader who has vital passions and masterful desires. His worshipof money is bound up with his consciousness of inward defeat. And inthe modern world generally, it is the decay of life which has promotedthe religion of material goods; and the religion of material goods, inits turn, has hastened the decay of life on which it thrives. The manwho worships money has ceased to hope for happiness through his ownefforts or in his own activities: he looks upon happiness as a passiveenjoyment of pleasures derived from the outside world. The artist orthe lover does not worship money in his moments of ardor, becausehis desires are specific, and directed towards objects which only hecan create. And conversely, the worshiper of money can never achievegreatness as an artist or a lover.Love of money has been denounced by moralists since the world began.I do not wish to add another to the moral denunciations, of which theefficacy in the past has not been encouraging. I wish to show how theworship of money is both an effect and a cause of diminishing vitality,and how our institutions might be changed so as to make the worshipof money grow less and the general vitality grow more. It is not thedesire for money as a means to definite ends that is in question. Astruggling artist may desire money in order to have leisure for hisart, but this desire is finite, and can be satisfied fully by a verymodest sum. It is the _worship_ of money that I wish to consider: thebelief that all values may be measured in terms of money, and thatmoney is the ultimate test of success in life. This belief is held infact, if not in words, by multitudes of men and women, and yet it isnot in harmony with human nature, since it ignores vital needs and theinstinctive tendency towards some specific kind of growth. It makesmen treat as unimportant those of their desires which run counter tothe acquisition of money, and yet such desires are, as a rule, moreimportant to well-being than any increase of income. It leads men tomutilate their own natures from a mistaken theory of what constitutessuccess, and to give admiration to enterprises which add nothing tohuman welfare. It promotes a dead uniformity of character and purpose,a diminution in the joy of life, and a stress and strain which leaveswhole communities weary, discouraged, and disillusioned.America, the pioneer of Western progress, is thought by many to displaythe worship of money in its most perfect form. A well-to-do American,who already has more than enough money to satisfy all reasonablerequirements, almost always continues to work at his office withan assiduity which would only be pardonable if starvation were thealternative.But England, except among a small minority, is almost as much givenover to the worship of money as America. Love of money in Englandtakes, as a rule, the form of snobbishly desiring to maintain a certainsocial status, rather than of striving after an indefinite increaseof income. Men postpone marriage until they have an income enablingthem to have as many rooms and servants in their house as they feelthat their dignity requires. This makes it necessary for them whilethey are young to keep a watch upon their affections, lest they shouldbe led into an imprudence: they acquire a cautious habit of mind, anda fear of “giving themselves away,” which makes a free and vigorouslife impossible. In acting as they do they imagine that they are beingvirtuous, since they would feel it a hardship for a woman to be askedto descend to a lower social status than that of her parents, and adegradation to themselves to marry a woman whose social status was notequal to their own. The things of nature are not valued in comparisonwith money. It is not thought a hardship for a woman to have to accept,as her only experience of love, the prudent and limited attentions ofa man whose capacity for emotion has been lost during years of wiserestraint or sordid relations with women whom he did not respect.The woman herself does not know that it is a hardship; for she, too,has been taught prudence for fear of a descent in the social scale,and from early youth she has had it instilled into her that strongfeeling does not become a young woman. So the two unite to slip throughlife in ignorance of all that is worth knowing. Their ancestors werenot restrained from passion by the fear of hell-fire, but they arerestrained effectually by a worse fear, the fear of coming down in theworld.The same motives which lead men to marry late also lead them to limittheir families. Professional men wish to send their sons to a publicschool, though the education they will obtain is no better than at agrammar school, and the companions with whom they will associate aremore vicious. But snobdom has decided that public schools are best, andfrom its verdict there is no appeal. What makes them the best is thatthey are the most expensive. And the same social struggle, in varyingforms, runs through all classes except the very highest and the verylowest. For this purpose men and women make great moral efforts, andshow amazing powers of self-control; but all their efforts and alltheir self-control, being not used for any creative end, serve merelyto dry up the well-spring of life within them, to make them feeble,listless, and trivial. It is not in such a soil that the passion whichproduces genius can be nourished. Men’s souls have exchanged thewilderness for the drawing-room: they have become cramped and pettyand deformed, like Chinese women’s feet. Even the horrors of war havehardly awakened them from the smug somnambulism of respectability.And it is chiefly the worship of money that has brought about thisdeathlike slumber of all that makes men great.In France the worship of money takes the form of thrift. It is noteasy to make a fortune in France, but an inherited competence is verycommon, and where it exists the main purpose of life is to hand iton undiminished, if not increased. The French _rentier_ is one of thegreat forces in international politics: it is he through whom Francehas been strengthened in diplomacy and weakened in war, by increasingthe supply of French capital and diminishing the supply of French men.The necessity of providing a _dot_ for daughters, and the subdivisionof property by the law of inheritance, have made the family morepowerful, as an institution, than in any other civilized country. Inorder that the family may prosper, it is kept small, and the individualmembers are often sacrificed to it. The desire for family continuitymakes men timid and unadventurous: it is only in the organizedproletariat that the daring spirit survives which made the Revolutionand led the world in political thought and practice. Through theinfluence of money, the strength of the family has become a weaknessto the nation by making the population remain stationary and even tendto decline. The same love of safety is beginning to produce the sameeffects elsewhere; but in this, as in many better things, France hasled the way.In Germany the worship of money is more recent than in France, England,and America; indeed, it hardly existed until after the Franco-PrussianWar. But it has been adopted now with the same intensity andwhole-heartedness which have always marked German beliefs. It ischaracteristic that, as in France the worship of money is associatedwith the family, so in Germany it is associated with the State. Liszt,in deliberate revolt against the English economists, taught hiscompatriots to think of economics in national terms, and the Germanwho develops a business is felt, by others as well as by himself, tobe performing a service to the State. Germans believe that England’sgreatness is due to industrialism and Empire, and that our success inthese is due to an intense nationalism. The apparent internationalismof our Free Trade policy they regard as mere hypocrisy. They have setthemselves to imitate what they believe we really are, with only thehypocrisy omitted. It must be admitted that their success has beenamazing. But in the process they have destroyed almost all that madeGermany of value to the world, and they have not adopted whatever ofgood there may have been among us, since that was all swept aside inthe wholesale condemnation of “hypocrisy.” And in adopting our worstfaults, they have made them far worse by a system, a thoroughness, anda unanimity of which we are happily incapable. Germany’s religion isof great importance to the world, since Germans have a power of realbelief, and have the energy to acquire the virtues and vices whichtheir creed demands. For the sake of the world, as well as for the sakeof Germany, we must hope that they will soon abandon the worship ofwealth which they have unfortunately learnt from us.Worship of money is no new thing, but it is a more harmful thing thanit used to be, for several reasons. Industrialism has made work morewearisome and intense, less capable of affording pleasure and interestby the way to the man who has undertaken it for the sake of money. Thepower of limiting families has opened a new field for the operationof thrift. The general increase in education and self-discipline hasmade men more capable of pursuing a purpose consistently in spite oftemptations, and when the purpose is against life it becomes moredestructive with every increase of tenacity in those who adopt it. Thegreater productivity resulting from industrialism has enabled us todevote more labor and capital to armies and navies for the protectionof our wealth from envious neighbors, and for the exploitation ofinferior races, which are ruthlessly wasted by the capitalist régime.Through the fear of losing money, forethought and anxiety eat awaymen’s power of happiness, and the dread of misfortune becomes a greatermisfortune than the one which is dreaded. The happiest men and women,as we can all testify from our own experience, are those who areindifferent to money because they have some positive purpose whichshuts it out. And yet all our political thought, whether imperialist,radical, or socialist, continues to occupy itself almost exclusivelywith men’s economic desires, as though they alone had real importance.In judging of an industrial system, whether the one under which welive or one proposed by reformers, there are four main tests whichmay be applied. We may consider whether the system secures (1) themaximum of production, or (2) justice in distribution, or (3) atolerable existence for producers, or (4) the greatest possiblefreedom and stimulus to vitality and progress. We may say, broadly,that the present system aims only at the first of these objects, whilesocialism aims at the second and third. Some defenders of the presentsystem contend that technical progress is better promoted by privateenterprise than it would be if industry were in the hands of theState; to this extent they recognize the fourth of the objects we haveenumerated. But they recognize it only on the side of the goods andthe capitalist, not on the side of the wage-earner. I believe that thefourth is much the most important of the objects to be aimed at, thatthe present system is fatal to it, and that orthodox socialism mightwell prove equally fatal.One of the least questioned assumptions of the capitalist system is,that production ought to be increased in amount by every possiblemeans: by new kinds of machinery, by employment of women and boys, bymaking hours of labor as long as is compatible with efficiency. CentralAfrican natives, accustomed to living on raw fruits of the earth anddefeating Manchester by dispensing with clothes, are compelled towork by a hut tax which they can only pay by taking employment underEuropean capitalists. It is admitted that they are perfectly happywhile they remain free from European influences, and that industrialismbrings upon them, not only the unwonted misery of confinement, butalso death from diseases to which white men have become partiallyimmune. It is admitted that the best negro workers are the “rawnatives,” fresh from the bush, uncontaminated by previous experience ofwage-earning. Nevertheless, no one effectively contends that they oughtto be preserved from the deterioration which we bring, since no oneeffectively doubts that it is good to increase the world’s productionat no matter what cost.The belief in the importance of production has a fanaticalirrationality and ruthlessness. So long as something is produced, whatit is that is produced seems to be thought a matter of no account. Ourwhole economic system encourages this view, since fear of unemploymentmakes any kind of work a boon to wage-earners. The mania for increasingproduction has turned men’s thoughts away from much more importantproblems, and has prevented the world from getting the benefits itmight have got out of the increased productivity of labor.When we are fed and clothed and housed, further material goods areneeded only for ostentation.[12] With modern methods, a certainproportion of the population, without working long hours, could do allthe work that is really necessary in the way of producing commodities.The time which is now spent in producing luxuries could be spent partlyin enjoyment and country holidays, partly in better education, partlyin work that is not manual or subserving manual work. We could, if wewished, have far more science and art, more diffused knowledge andmental cultivation, more leisure for wage-earners, and more capacityfor intelligent pleasures. At present not only wages, but almost allearned incomes, can only be obtained by working much longer hours thanmen ought to work. A man who earns £800 a year by hard work could not,as a rule, earn £400 a year by half as much work. Often he could notearn anything if he were not willing to work practically all day andevery day. Because of the excessive belief in the value of production,it is thought right and proper for men to work long hours, and thegood that might result from shorter hours is not realized. And all thecruelties of the industrial system, not only in Europe but even morein the tropics, arouse only an occasional feeble protest from a fewphilanthropists. This is because, owing to the distortion produced byour present economic methods, men’s conscious desires, in such matters,cover only a very small part, and that not the most important part, ofthe real needs affected by industrial work. If this is to be remedied,it can only be by a different economic system, in which the relation ofactivity to needs will be less concealed and more direct.The purpose of maximizing production will not be achieved in the longrun if our present industrial system continues. Our present system iswasteful of human material, partly through damage to the health andefficiency of industrial workers, especially when women and childrenare employed, partly through the fact that the best workers tend tohave small families and that the more civilized races are in danger ofgradual extinction. Every great city is a center of race-deterioration.For the case of London this has been argued with a wealth ofstatistical detail by Sir H. Llewelyn Smith;[13] and it cannot easilybe doubted that it is equally true in other cases. The same is true ofmaterial resources: the minerals, the virgin forests, and the newlydeveloped wheatfields of the world are being exhausted with a recklessprodigality which entails almost a certainty of hardship for futuregenerations.Socialists see the remedy in State ownership of land and capital,combined with a more just system of distribution. It cannot be deniedthat our present system of distribution is indefensible from everypoint of view, including the point of view of justice. Our system ofdistribution is regulated by law, and is capable of being changedin many respects which familiarity makes us regard as natural andinevitable. We may distinguish four chief sources of recognized legalrights to private property: (1) a man’s right to what he has madehimself; (2) the right to interest on capital which has been lent;(3) the ownership of land; (4) inheritance. These form a crescendo ofrespectability: capital is more respectable than labor, land is morerespectable than capital, and any form of wealth is more respectablewhen it is inherited than when it has been acquired by our ownexertions.A man’s right to the produce of his own labor has never, in fact,had more than a very limited recognition from the law. The earlysocialists, especially the English forerunners of Marx, used to insistupon this right as the basis of a just system of distribution, but inthe complication of modern industrial processes it is impossible tosay what a man has produced. What proportion of the goods carried by arailway should belong to the goods porters concerned in their journey?When a surgeon saves a man’s life by an operation, what proportion ofthe commodities which the man subsequently produces can the surgeonjustly claim? Such problems are insoluble. And there is no specialjustice, even if they were soluble, in allowing to each man what hehimself produces. Some men are stronger, healthier, cleverer, thanothers, but there is no reason for increasing these natural injusticesby the artificial injustices of the law. The principle recommendsitself partly as a way of abolishing the very rich, partly as a way ofstimulating people to work hard. But the first of these objects can bebetter obtained in other ways, and the second ceases to be obviouslydesirable as soon as we cease to worship money.Interest arises naturally in any community in which private property isunrestricted and theft is punished, because some of the most economicalprocesses of production are slow, and those who have the skill toperform them may not have the means of living while they are beingcompleted. But the power of lending money gives such great wealthand influence to private capitalists that unless strictly controlledit is not compatible with any real freedom for the rest of thepopulation. Its effects at present, both in the industrial world and ininternational politics, are so bad that it seems imperatively necessaryto devise some means of curbing its power.Private property in land has no justification except historicallythrough power of the sword. In the beginning of feudal times, certainmen had enough military strength to be able to force those whom theydisliked not to live in a certain area. Those whom they chose to leaveon the land became their serfs, and were forced to work for them inreturn for the gracious permission to stay. In order to establish lawin place of private force, it was necessary, in the main, to leaveundisturbed the rights which had been acquired by the sword. The landbecame the property of those who had conquered it, and the serfs wereallowed to give rent instead of service. There is no justification forprivate property in land, except the historical necessity to conciliateturbulent robbers who would not otherwise have obeyed the law. Thisnecessity arose in Europe many centuries ago, but in Africa thewhole process is often quite recent. It is by this process, slightlydisguised, that the Kimberley diamond mines and the Rand gold mineswere acquired in spite of prior native rights. It is a singular exampleof human inertia that men should have continued until now to endurethe tyranny and extortion which a small minority are able to inflictby their possession of the land. No good to the community, of anysort or kind, results from the private ownership of land. If men werereasonable, they would decree that it should cease to-morrow, with nocompensation beyond a moderate life income to the present holders.The mere abolition of rent would not remove injustice, since it wouldconfer a capricious advantage upon the occupiers of the best sites andthe most fertile land. It is necessary that there should be rent, butit should be paid to the State or to some body which performs publicservices; or, if the total rental were more than is required for suchpurposes, it might be paid into a common fund and divided equally amongthe population. Such a method would be just, and would not only help torelieve poverty, but would prevent wasteful employment of land and thetyranny of local magnates. Much that appears as the power of capitalis really the power of the landowner—for example, the power of railwaycompanies and mine-owners. The evil and injustice of the present systemare glaring, but men’s patience of preventable evils to which they areaccustomed is so great that it is impossible to guess when they willput an end to this strange absurdity.Inheritance, which is the source of the greater part of the unearnedincome in the world, is regarded by most men as a natural right.Sometimes, as in England, the right is inherent in the owner ofproperty, who may dispose of it in any way that seems good to him.Sometimes, as in France, his right is limited by the right of hisfamily to inherit at least a portion of what he has to leave. Butneither the right to dispose of property by will nor the right ofchildren to inherit from parents has any basis outside the instincts ofpossession and family pride.There may be reasons for allowing a man whose work is exceptionallyfruitful—for instance, an inventor—to enjoy a larger income than isenjoyed by the average citizen, but there can be no good reason forallowing this privilege to descend to his children and grandchildrenand so on for ever. The effect is to produce an idle and exceptionallyfortunate class, who are influential through their money, and opposedto reform for fear it should be directed against themselves. Theirwhole habit of thought becomes timid, since they dread being forcedto acknowledge that their position is indefensible; yet snobbery andthe wish to secure their favor leads almost the whole middle-class toape their manners and adopt their opinions. In this way they become apoison infecting the outlook of almost all educated people.It is sometimes said that without the incentive of inheritance menwould not work so well. The great captains of industry, we are assured,are actuated by the desire to found a family, and would not devotetheir lives to unremitting toil without the hope of gratifying thisdesire. I do not believe that any large proportion of really usefulwork is done from this motive. Ordinary work is done for the sake ofa living, and the very best work is done for the interest of the workitself. Even the captains of industry, who are thought (perhaps bythemselves as well as by others) to be aiming at founding a family,are probably more actuated by love of power and by the adventurouspleasure of great enterprises. And if there were some slight diminutionin the amount of work done, it would be well worth while in orderto get rid of the idle rich, with the oppression, feebleness, andcorruption which they inevitably introduce.The present system of distribution is not based upon any principle.Starting from a system imposed by conquest, the arrangements made bythe conquerors for their own benefit were stereotyped by the law, andhave never been fundamentally reconstructed. On what principles oughtthe reconstruction to be based?Socialism, which is the most widely advocated scheme of reconstruction,aims chiefly at _justice_: the present inequalities of wealth areunjust, and socialism would abolish them. It is not essential tosocialism that all men should have the same income, but it is essentialthat inequalities should be justified, in each case, by inequalityof need or of service performed. There can be no disputing that thepresent system is grossly unjust, and that almost all that is unjustin it is harmful. But I do not think justice alone is a sufficientprinciple upon which to base an economic reconstruction. Justice wouldbe secured if all were equally unhappy, as well as if all were equallyhappy. Justice, by itself, when once realized, contains no source ofnew life. The old type of Marxian revolutionary socialist never dwelt,in imagination, upon the life of communities after the establishmentof the millennium. He imagined that, like the Prince and Princess ina fairy story, they would live happily ever after. But that is not acondition possible to human nature. Desire, activity, purpose, areessential to a tolerable life, and a millennium, though it may be a joyin prospect, would be intolerable if it were actually achieved.The more modern socialists, it is true, have lost most of the religiousfervor which characterized the pioneers, and view socialism as atendency rather than a definite goal. But they still retain the viewthat what is of most political importance to a man is his income,and that the principal aim of a democratic politician ought to beto increase the wages of labor. I believe this involves too passivea conception of what constitutes happiness. It is true that, in theindustrial world, large sections of the population are too poor tohave any possibility of a good life; but it is not true that a goodlife will come of itself with a diminution of poverty. Very few of thewell-to-do classes have a good life at present, and perhaps socialismwould only substitute the evils which now afflict the more prosperousin place of the evils resulting from destitution.In the existing labor movement, although it is one of the most vitalsources of change, there are certain tendencies against which reformersought to be on their guard. The labor movement is in essence a movementin favor of justice, based upon the belief that the sacrifice of themany to the few is not necessary now, whatever may have been the casein the past. When labor was less productive and education was lesswidespread, an aristocratic civilization may have been the only onepossible: it may have been necessary that the many should contributeto the life of the few, if the few were to transmit and increase theworld’s possessions in art and thought and civilized existence. Butthis necessity is past or rapidly passing, and there is no longer anyvalid objection to the claims of justice. The labor movement is morallyirresistible, and is not now seriously opposed except by prejudiceand simple self-assertion. All living thought is on its side; what isagainst it is traditional and dead. But although it itself is living,it is not by any means certain that it will make for life.Labor is led by current political thought in certain directions whichwould become repressive and dangerous if they were to remain strongafter labor had triumphed. The aspirations of the labor movement are,on the whole, opposed by the great majority of the educated classes,who feel a menace, not only or chiefly to their personal comfort,but to the civilized life in which they have their part, whichthey profoundly believe to be important to the world. Owing to theopposition of the educated classes, labor, when it is revolutionary andvigorous, tends to despise all that the educated classes represent.When it is more respectful, as its leaders tend to be in England, thesubtle and almost unconscious influence of educated men is apt to saprevolutionary ardor, producing doubt and uncertainty instead of theswift, simple assurance by which victory might have been won. The verysympathy which the best men in the well-to-do classes extend to labor,their very readiness to admit the justice of its claims, may have theeffect of softening the opposition of labor leaders to the _statusquo_, and of opening their minds to the suggestion that no fundamentalchange is possible. Since these influences affect leaders much morethan the rank and file, they tend to produce in the rank and file adistrust of leaders, and a desire to seek out new leaders who will beless ready to concede the claims of the more fortunate classes. Theresult may be in the end a labor movement as hostile to the life of themind as some terrified property-owners believe it to be at present.The claims of justice, narrowly interpreted, may reinforce thistendency. It may be thought unjust that some men should have largerincomes or shorter hours of work than other men. But efficiency inmental work, including the work of education, certainly requires morecomfort and longer periods of rest than are required for efficiencyin physical work, if only because mental work is not physiologicallywholesome. If this is not recognized, the life of the mind may sufferthrough short-sightedness even more than through deliberate hostility.Education suffers at present, and may long continue to suffer, throughthe desire of parents that their children should earn money as soonas possible. Every one knows that the half-time system, for example,is bad; but the power of organized labor keeps it in existence. It isclear that the cure for this evil, as for those that are concerned withthe population question, is to relieve parents of the expense of theirchildren’s education, and at the same time to take away their right toappropriate their children’s earnings.The way to prevent any dangerous opposition of labor to the life ofthe mind is not to oppose the labor movement, which is too strong tobe opposed with justice. The right way is, to show by actual practicethat thought is useful to labor, that without thought its positive aimscannot be achieved, and that there are men in the world of thought whoare willing to devote their energies to helping labor in its struggle.Such men, if they are wise and sincere, can prevent labor from becomingdestructive of what is living in the intellectual world.Another danger in the aims of organized labor is the danger ofconservatism as to methods of production. Improvements of machineryor organization bring great advantages to employers, but involvetemporary and sometimes permanent loss to the wage-earners. For thisreason, and also from mere instinctive dislike of any change of habits,strong labor organizations are often obstacles to technical progress.The ultimate basis of all social progress must be increased technicalefficiency, a greater result from a given amount of labor. If laborwere to offer an effective opposition to this kind of progress, itwould in the long run paralyze all other progress. The way to overcomethe opposition of labor is not by hostility or moral homilies, but bygiving to labor the direct interest in economical processes which nowbelongs to the employers. Here, as elsewhere, the unprogressive part ofa movement which is essentially progressive is to be eliminated, notby decrying the whole movement but by giving it a wider sweep, makingit more progressive, and leading it to demand an even greater changein the structure of society than any that it had contemplated in itsinception.The most important purpose that political institutions can achieve isto keep alive in individuals creativeness, vigor, vitality, and thejoy of life. These things existed, for example, in Elizabethan Englandin a way in which they do not exist now. They stimulated adventure,poetry, music, fine architecture, and set going the whole movement outof which England’s greatness has sprung in every direction in whichEngland has been great. These things coexisted with injustice, butoutweighed it, and made a national life more admirable than any that islikely to exist under socialism.What is wanted in order to keep men full of vitality is opportunity,not security. Security is merely a refuge from fear; opportunity is thesource of hope. The chief test of an economic system is not whetherit makes men prosperous, or whether it secures distributive justice(though these are both very desirable), but whether it leaves men’sinstinctive growth unimpeded. To achieve this purpose, there are twomain conditions which it should fulfil: it should not cramp men’sprivate affections, and it should give the greatest possible outletto the impulse of creation. There is in most men, until it becomesatrophied by disuse, an instinct of constructiveness, a wish to makesomething. The men who achieve most are, as a rule, those in whomthis instinct is strongest: such men become artists, men of science,statesmen, empire-builders, or captains of industry, according to theaccidents of temperament and opportunity. The most beneficent and themost harmful careers are inspired by this impulse. Without it, theworld would sink to the level of Tibet: it would subsist, as it isalways prone to do, on the wisdom of its ancestors, and each generationwould sink more deeply into a lifeless traditionalism.But it is not only the remarkable men who have the instinct ofconstructiveness, though it is they who have it most strongly. It isalmost universal in boys, and in men it usually survives in a greateror less degree, according to the greater or less outlet which it isable to find. Work inspired by this instinct is satisfying, even whenit is irksome and difficult, because every effort is as natural asthe effort of a dog pursuing a hare. The chief defect of the presentcapitalistic system is that work done for wages very seldom affordsany outlet for the creative impulse. The man who works for wages hasno choice as to what he shall make: the whole creativeness of theprocesses concentrate in the employer who orders the work to be done.For this reason the work becomes a merely external means to a certainresult, the earning of wages. Employers grow indignant about the tradeunion rules for limitation of output, but they have no right to beindignant, since they do not permit the men whom they employ to haveany share in the purpose for which the work is undertaken. And sothe process of production, which should form one instinctive cycle,becomes divided into separate purposes, which can no longer provide anysatisfaction of instinct for those who do the work.This result is due to our industrial system, but it would not beavoided by socialism. In a socialist community, the State would bethe employer, and the individual workman would have almost as littlecontrol over his work as he has at present. Such control as he couldexercise would be indirect, through political channels, and would betoo slight and roundabout to afford any appreciable satisfaction. It isto be feared that instead of an increase of self-direction, there wouldonly be an increase of mutual interference.The total abolition of private capitalistic enterprise, which isdemanded by Marxian socialism, seems scarcely necessary. Most men whoconstruct sweeping systems of reform, like most of those who defend the_status quo_, do not allow enough for the importance of exceptions andthe undesirability of rigid system. Provided the sphere of capitalismis restricted, and a large proportion of the population are rescuedfrom its dominion, there is no reason to wish it wholly abolished. As acompetitor and a rival, it might serve a useful purpose in preventingmore democratic enterprises from sinking into sloth and technicalconservatism. But it is of the very highest importance that capitalismshould become the exception rather than the rule, and that the bulk ofthe world’s industry should be conducted on a more democratic system.Much of what is to be said against militarism in the State is alsoto be said against capitalism in the economic sphere. Economicorganizations, in the pursuit of efficiency, grow larger and larger,and there is no possibility of reversing this process. The causes oftheir growth are technical, and large organizations must be acceptedas an essential part of civilized society. But there is no reasonwhy their government should be centralized and monarchical. Thepresent economic system, by robbing most men of initiative, is oneof the causes of the universal weariness which devitalizes urban andindustrial populations, making them perpetually seek excitement, andleading them to welcome even the outbreak of war as a relief from thedreary monotony of their daily lives.If the vigor of the nation is to be preserved, if we are to retain anycapacity for new ideas, if we are not to sink into a Chinese conditionof stereotyped immobility, the monarchical organization of industrymust be swept away. All large businesses must become democratic andfederal in their government. The whole wage-earning system is anabomination, not only because of the social injustice which it causesand perpetuates, but also because it separates the man who does thework from the purpose for which the work is done. The whole of thecontrolling purpose is concentrated in the capitalist; the purpose ofthe wage-earner is not the produce, but the wages. The purpose of thecapitalist is to secure the maximum of work for the minimum of wages;the purpose of the wage-earner is to secure the maximum of wages forthe minimum of work. A system involving this essential conflict ofinterests cannot be expected to work smoothly or successfully, or toproduce a community with any pride in efficiency.Two movements exist, one already well advanced, the other in itsinfancy, which seem capable, between them, of effecting most of whatis needed. The two movements I mean are the coöperative movement andsyndicalism. The coöperative movement is capable of replacing the wagesystem over a very wide field, but it is not easy to see how it couldbe applied to such things as railways. It is just in these cases thatthe principles of syndicalism are most easily applicable.If organization is not to crush individuality, membership of anorganization ought to be voluntary, not compulsory, and ought alwaysto carry with it a voice in the management. This is not the case witheconomic organizations, which give no opportunity for the pride andpleasure that men find in an activity of their own choice, provided itis not utterly monotonous.It must be admitted, however, that much of the mechanical work which isnecessary in industry is probably not capable of being made interestingin itself. But it will seem less tedious than it does at present ifthose who do it have a voice in the management of their industry.And men who desire leisure for other occupations might be given theopportunity of doing uninteresting work during a few hours of the dayfor a low wage; this would give an opening to all who wished for someactivity not immediately profitable to themselves. When everythingthat is possible has been done to make work interesting, the residuewill have to be made endurable, as almost all work is at present, bythe inducement of rewards outside the hours of labor. But if theserewards are to be satisfactory, it is essential that the uninterestingwork should not necessarily absorb a man’s whole energies, and thatopportunities should exist for more or less continuous activitiesduring the remaining hours. Such a system might be an immeasurableboon to artists, men of letters, and others who produce for their ownsatisfaction works which the public does not value soon enough tosecure a living for the producers; and apart from such rather rarecases, it might provide an opportunity for young men and women withintellectual ambitions to continue their education after they haveleft school, or to prepare themselves for careers which require anexceptionally long training.The evils of the present system result from the separation between theseveral interests of consumer, producer, and capitalist. No one ofthese three has the same interests as the community or as either ofthe other two. The coöperative system amalgamates the interests ofconsumer and capitalist; syndicalism would amalgamate the interestsof producer and capitalist. Neither amalgamates all three, or makesthe interests of those who direct industry quite identical with thoseof the community. Neither, therefore, would wholly prevent industrialstrife, or obviate the need of the State as arbitrator. But eitherwould be better than the present system, and probably a mixture ofboth would cure most of the evils of industrialism as it exists now.It is surprising that, while men and women have struggled to achievepolitical democracy, so little has been done to introduce democracy inindustry. I believe incalculable benefits might result from industrialdemocracy, either on the coöperative model or with recognition of atrade or industry as a unit for purposes of government, with somekind of Home Rule such as syndicalism aims at securing. There isno reason why all governmental units should be geographical: thissystem was necessary in the past because of the slowness of means ofcommunication, but it is not necessary now. By some such system manymen might come to feel again a pride in their work, and to find againthat outlet for the creative impulse which is now denied to all but afortunate few. Such a system requires the abolition of the land-ownerand the restriction of the capitalist, but does not entail equality ofearnings. And unlike socialism, it is not a static or final system: itis hardly more than a framework for energy and initiative. It is onlyby some such method, I believe, that the free growth of the individualcan be reconciled with the huge technical organizations which have beenrendered necessary by industrialism.