In spite of the fact that most nations at most times, are at peace, waris one of the permanent institutions of all free communities, just asParliament is one of our permanent institutions in spite of the factthat it is not always sitting. It is war as a permanent institutionthat I wish to consider: why men tolerate it; why they ought not totolerate it; what hope there is of their coming not to tolerate it; andhow they could abolish it if they wished to do so.War is a conflict between two groups, each of which attempts to killand maim as many as possible of the other group in order to achievesome object which it desires. The object is generally either power orwealth. It is a pleasure to exercise authority over other men, and itis a pleasure to live on the produce of other men’s labor. The victorin war can enjoy more of these delights than the vanquished. But war,like all other natural activities, is not so much prompted by the endwhich it has in view as by an impulse to the activity itself. Veryoften men desire an end, not on its own account, but because theirnature demands the actions which will lead to the end. And so it isin this case: the ends to be achieved by war appear in prospect farmore important than they will appear when they are realized, becausewar itself is a fulfilment of one side of our nature. If men’s actionssprang from desires for what would in fact bring happiness, the purelyrational arguments against war would have long ago put an end toit. What makes war difficult to suppress is that it springs from animpulse, rather than from a calculation of the advantages to be derivedfrom war.War differs from the employment of force by the police through the factthat the actions of the police are ordered by a neutral authority,whereas in war it is the parties to the dispute themselves who setforce in motion. This distinction is not absolute, since the State isnot always wholly neutral in internal disturbances. When strikers areshot down, the State is taking the side of the rich. When opinionsadverse to the existing State are punished, the State is obviously oneof the parties to the dispute. And from the suppression of individualopinion up to civil war all gradations are possible. But broadlyspeaking, force employed according to laws previously laid down bythe community as a whole may be distinguished from force employed byone community against another on occasions of which the one communityis the sole judge. I have dwelt upon this difference because I do notthink the use of force by the police can be wholly eliminated, and Ithink a similar use of force in international affairs is the best hopeof permanent peace. At present, international affairs are regulated bythe principle that a nation must not intervene unless its interestsare involved: diplomatic usage forbids intervention for the meremaintenance of international law. America may protest when Americancitizens are drowned by German submarines, but must not protest when noAmerican citizens are involved. The case would be analogous in internalaffairs if the police would only interfere with murder when it happenedthat a policeman had been killed. So long as this principle prevails inthe relations of States, the power of neutrals cannot be effectivelyemployed to prevent war.In every civilized country two forces coöperate to produce war.In ordinary times some men—usually a small proportion of thepopulation—are bellicose: they predict war, and obviously are notunhappy in the prospect. So long as war is not imminent, the bulk ofthe population pay little attention to these men, and do not activelyeither support or oppose them. But when war begins to seem very near, awar fever seizes hold of people, and those who were already bellicosefind themselves enthusiastically supported by all but an insignificantminority. The impulses which inspire war fever are rather differentfrom those which make some men bellicose in ordinary times. Onlyeducated men are likely to be warlike at ordinary times, since theyalone are vividly aware of other countries or of the part which theirown nation might play in the affairs of the world. But it is only theirknowledge, not their nature, that distinguishes them from their moreignorant compatriots.To take the most obvious example, German policy, in recent years beforethe war, was not averse from war, and not friendly to England. It isworth while to try to understand the state of mind from which thispolicy sprang.The men who direct German policy are, to begin with, patriotic to anextent which is almost unknown in France and England. The interests ofGermany appear to them unquestionably the only interests they need takeinto account. What injury may, in pursuing those interests, be done toother nations, what destruction may be brought upon populations andcities, what irreparable damage may result to civilization, it is notfor them to consider. If they can confer what they regard as benefitsupon Germany, everything else is of no account.The second noteworthy point about German policy is that its conceptionof national welfare is mainly competitive. It is not the _intrinsic_wealth of Germany, whether materially or mentally, that the rulersof Germany consider important: it is the _comparative_ wealth inthe competition with other civilized countries. For this reason thedestruction of good things abroad appears to them almost as desirableas the creation of good things in Germany. In most parts of the worldthe French are regarded as the most civilized of nations: their artand their literature and their way of life have an attraction forforeigners which those of Germany do not have. The English havedeveloped political liberty, and the art of maintaining an Empire witha minimum of coercion, in a way for which Germany, hitherto, has shownno aptitude. These are grounds for envy, and envy wishes to destroywhat is good in other countries. German militarists, quite rightly,judged that what was best in France and England would probably bedestroyed by a great war, even if France and England were not in theend defeated in the actual fighting. I have seen a list of young Frenchwriters killed on the battlefield; probably the German authorities havealso seen it, and have reflected with joy that another year of suchlosses will destroy French literature for a generation—perhaps, throughloss of tradition, for ever. Every outburst against liberty in our morebellicose newspapers, every incitement to persecution of defenselessGermans, every mark of growing ferocity in our attitude, must be readwith delight by German patriots, as proving their success in robbing usof our best, and in forcing us to imitate whatever is worst in Prussia.But what the rulers of Germany have envied us most was power andwealth—the power derived from command of the seas and the straits,the wealth derived from a century of industrial supremacy. In boththese respects they feel that their deserts are higher than ours. Theyhave devoted far more thought and skill to military and industrialorganization. Their average of intelligence and knowledge is farsuperior; their capacity for pursuing an attainable end, unitedly andwith forethought, is infinitely greater. Yet we, merely (as they think)because we had a start in the race, have achieved a vastly largerEmpire than they have, and an enormously greater control of capital.All this is unbearable; yet nothing but a great war can alter it.Besides all these feelings, there is in many Germans, especially inthose who know us best, a hot hatred of us on account of our pride.Farinata degli Uberti surveyed Hell “_come avesse lo Inferno in grandispitto_.” Just so, by German accounts, English officer prisonerslook round them among their captors—holding aloof, as though the enemywere noxious, unclean creatures, toads or slugs or centipedes, whicha man does not touch willingly, and shakes off with loathing if heis forced to touch them for a moment. It is easy to imagine how thedevils hated Farinata, and inflicted greater pains upon him than uponhis neighbors, hoping to win recognition by some slight wincing on hispart, driven to frenzy by his continuing to behave as if they did notexist. In just the same way the Germans are maddened by our spiritualimmobility. At bottom we have regarded the Germans as one regards flieson a hot day: they are a nuisance, one has to brush them off, but itwould not occur to one to be turned aside by them. Now that the initialcertainty of victory has faded, we begin to be affected inwardly by theGermans. In time, if we continue to fail in our military enterprises,we shall realize that they are human beings, not just a tiresomecircumstance. Then perhaps we shall hate them with a hatred which theywill have no reason to resent. And from such a hatred it will be only ashort journey to a genuine _rapprochement_.The problem which must be solved, if the future of the world is to beless terrible than its present, is the problem of preventing nationsfrom getting into the moods of England and Germany at the outbreak ofthe war. These two nations as they were at that moment might be takenas almost mythical representatives of pride and envy—cold pride andhot envy. Germany declaimed passionately: “You, England, swollen anddecrepit, you overshadow my whole growth—your rotting branches keepthe sun from shining upon me and the rain from nourishing me. Yourspreading foliage must be lopped, your symmetrical beauty must bedestroyed, that I too may have freedom to grow, that my young vigor mayno longer be impeded by your decaying mass.” England, bored and aloof,unconscious of the claims of outside forces, attempted absent-mindedlyto sweep away the upstart disturber of meditation; but the upstart wasnot swept away, and remains so far with every prospect of making goodhis claim. The claim and the resistance to it are alike folly. Germanyhad no good ground for envy; we had no good ground for resistingwhatever in Germany’s demands was compatible with our continuedexistence. Is there any method of averting such reciprocal folly in thefuture?I think if either the English or the Germans were capable of thinkingin terms of individual welfare rather than national pride, they wouldhave seen that, at every moment during the war the wisest course wouldhave been to conclude peace at once, on the best terms that could havebeen obtained. This course, I am convinced, would have been the wisestfor each separate nation, as well as for civilization in general. Theutmost evil that the enemy could inflict through an unfavorable peacewould be a trifle compared to the evil which all the nations inflictupon themselves by continuing to fight. What blinds us to this obviousfact is pride, the pride which makes the acknowledgment of defeatintolerable, and clothes itself in the garb of reason by suggestingall kinds of evils which are supposed to result from admitting defeat.But the only real evil of defeat is humiliation, and humiliation issubjective; we shall not feel humiliated if we become persuaded thatit was a mistake to engage in the war, and that it is better to pursueother tasks not dependent upon world-dominion. If either the English orthe Germans could admit this inwardly, any peace which did not destroynational independence could be accepted without real loss in theself-respect which is essential to a good life.The mood in which Germany embarked upon the war was abominable, but itwas a mood fostered by the habitual mood of England. We have pridedourselves upon our territory and our wealth; we have been ready at alltimes to defend by force of arms what we have conquered in India andAfrica. If we had realized the futility of empire, and had shown awillingness to yield colonies to Germany without waiting for the threatof force, we might have been in a position to persuade the Germansthat their ambitions were foolish, and that the respect of the worldwas not to be won by an imperialist policy. But by our resistance weshowed that we shared their standards. We, being in possession, becameenamored of the _status quo_. The Germans were willing to make war toupset the _status quo_; we were willing to make war to prevent itsbeing upset in Germany’s favor. So convinced were we of the sacrednessof the _status quo_ that we never realized how advantageous it was tous, or how, by insisting upon it, we shared the responsibility for thewar. In a world where nations grow and decay, where forces change andpopulations become cramped, it is not possible or desirable to maintainthe _status quo_ for ever. If peace is to be preserved, nations mustlearn to accept unfavorable alterations of the map without feeling thatthey must first be defeated in war, or that in yielding they incur ahumiliation.It is the insistence of legalists and friends of peace upon themaintenance of the _status quo_ that has driven Germany intomilitarism. Germany had as good a right to an Empire as any other GreatPower, but could only acquire an Empire through war. Love of peace hasbeen too much associated with a static conception of internationalrelations. In economic disputes we all know that whatever is vigorousin the wage-earning classes is opposed to “industrial peace,” becausethe existing distribution of wealth is felt to be unfair. Those whoenjoy a privileged position endeavor to bolster up their claims byappealing to the desire for peace, and decrying those who promotestrife between the classes. It never occurs to them that by opposingchanges without considering whether they are just, the capitalistsshare the responsibility for the class war. And in exactly the sameway England shares the responsibility for Germany’s war. If actual waris ever to cease there will have to be political methods of achievingthe results which now can only be achieved by successful fighting, andnations will have voluntarily to admit adverse claims which appear justin the judgment of neutrals.It is only by some such admission, embodying itself in a Parliamentof the nations with full power to alter the distribution of territory,that militarism can be permanently overcome. It may be that the presentwar will bring, in the Western nations, a change of mood and outlooksufficient to make such an institution possible. It may be that morewars and more destruction will be necessary before the majority ofcivilized men rebel against the brutality and futile destruction ofmodern war. But unless our standards of civilization and our powersof constructive thought are to be permanently lowered, I cannot doubtthat, sooner or later, reason will conquer the blind impulses which nowlead nations into war. And if a large majority of the Great Powers hada firm determination that peace should be preserved, there would beno difficulty in devising diplomatic machinery for the settlement ofdisputes, and in establishing educational systems which would implantin the minds of the young an ineradicable horror of the slaughter whichthey are now taught to admire.Besides the conscious and deliberate forces leading to war, there arethe inarticulate feelings of common men, which, in most civilizedcountries, are always ready to burst into war fever at the bidding ofstatesmen. If peace is to be secure, the readiness to catch war fevermust be somehow diminished. Whoever wishes to succeed in this mustfirst understand what war fever is and why it arises.The men who have an important influence in the world, whether forgood or evil, are dominated as a rule by a threefold desire: theydesire, first, an activity which calls fully into play the faculties inwhich they feel that they excel; secondly, the sense of successfullyovercoming resistance; thirdly, the respect of others on account oftheir success. The third of these desires is sometimes absent: somemen who have been great have been without the “last infirmity,” andhave been content with their own sense of success, or merely with thejoy of difficult effort. But as a rule all three are present. Somemen’s talents are specialized, so that their choice of activities iscircumscribed by the nature of their faculties; other men have, inyouth, such a wide range of possible aptitudes that their choice ischiefly determined by the varying degrees of respect which publicopinion gives to different kinds of success.The same desires, usually in a less marked degree, exist in men whohave no exceptional talents. But such men cannot achieve anythingvery difficult by their individual efforts; for them, as units, it isimpossible to acquire the sense of greatness or the triumph of strongresistance overcome. Their separate lives are unadventurous and dull.In the morning they go to the office or the plow, in the evening theyreturn tired and silent, to the sober monotony of wife and children.Believing that security is the supreme good, they have insured againstsickness and death, and have found an employment where they have littlefear of dismissal and no hope of any great rise. But security, onceachieved, brings a Nemesis of ennui. Adventure, imagination, risk,also have their claims; but how can these claims be satisfied by theordinary wage-earner? Even if it were possible to satisfy them, theclaims of wife and children have priority and must not be neglected.To this victim of order and good organization the realization comes,in some moment of sudden crisis, that he belongs to a nation, that hisnation may take risks, may engage in difficult enterprises, enjoy thehot passion of doubtful combat, stimulate adventure and imaginationby military expeditions to Mount Sinai and the Garden of Eden. Whathis nation does, in some sense, he does; what his nation suffers, hesuffers. The long years of private caution are avenged by a wild plungeinto public madness. All the horrid duties of thrift and order andcare which he has learnt to fulfil in private are thought not to applyto public affairs: it is patriotic and noble to be reckless for thenation, though it would be wicked to be reckless for oneself. The oldprimitive passions, which civilization has denied, surge up all thestronger for repression. In a moment imagination and instinct travelback through the centuries, and the wild man of the woods emerges fromthe mental prison in which he has been confined. This is the deeperpart of the psychology of the war fever.But besides the irrational and instinctive element in the warfever, there is always also, if only as a liberator of primitiveimpulse, a certain amount of quasi-rational calculation and what iseuphemistically called “thought.” The war fever very seldom seizes anation unless it believes that it will be victorious. Undoubtedly,under the influence of excitement, men over-estimate their chancesof success; but there is some proportion between what is hoped andwhat a rational man would expect. Holland, though quite as humane asEngland, had no impulse to go to war on behalf of Belgium, becausethe likelihood of disaster was so obviously overwhelming. The Londonpopulace, if they had known how the war was going to develop, wouldnot have rejoiced as they did on that August Bank Holiday long ago.A nation which has had a recent experience of war, and has come toknow that a war is almost always more painful than it is expectedto be at the outset, becomes much less liable to war fever until anew generation grows up. The element of rationality in war fever isrecognized by Governments and journalists who desire war, as may beseen by their invariably minimizing the perils of a war which theywish to provoke. At the beginning of the South African War Sir WilliamButler was dismissed, apparently for suggesting that sixty thousand menand three months might not suffice to subdue the Boer Republics. Andwhen the war proved long and difficult, the nation turned against thosewho had made it. We may assume, I think, without attributing too greata share to reason in human affairs, that a nation would not suffer fromwar fever in a case where every sane man could see that defeat wasvery probable.The importance of this lies in the fact that it would make aggressivewar very unlikely if its chances of success were very small. If thepeace-loving nations were sufficiently strong to be obviously capableof defeating the nations which were willing to wage aggressive war,the peace-loving nations might form an alliance and agree to fightjointly against any nation which refused to submit its claims to anInternational Council. Before the present war we might have reasonablyhoped to secure the peace of the world in some such way; but themilitary strength of Germany has shown that such a scheme has no greatchance of success at present. Perhaps at some not far distant date itmay be made more feasible by developments of policy in America.The economic and political forces which make for war could be easilycurbed if the will to peace existed strongly in all civilized nations.But so long as the populations are liable to war fever, all work forpeace must be precarious; and if war fever could not be aroused,political and economic forces would be powerless to produce any longor very destructive war. The fundamental problem for the pacifist isto prevent the impulse towards war which seizes whole communities fromtime to time. And this can only be done by far-reaching changes ineducation, in the economic structure of society, and in the moral codeby which public opinion controls the lives of men and women.[10]A great many of the impulses which now lead nations to go to war arein themselves essential to any vigorous or progressive life. Withoutimagination and love of adventure a society soon becomes stagnant andbegins to decay. Conflict, provided it is not destructive and brutal,is necessary in order to stimulate men’s activities, and to secure thevictory of what is living over what is dead or merely traditional. Thewish for the triumph of one’s cause, the sense of solidarity with largebodies of men, are not things which a wise man will wish to destroy. Itis only the outcome in death and destruction and hatred that is evil.The problem is, to keep these impulses, without making war the outletfor them.All Utopias that have hitherto been constructed are intolerably dull.Any man with any force in him would rather live in this world, withall its ghastly horrors, than in Plato’s Republic or among Swift’sHouyhnhnms. The men who make Utopias proceed upon a radically falseassumption as to what constitutes a good life. They conceive that itis possible to imagine a certain state of society and a certain way oflife which should be once for all recognized as good, and should thencontinue for ever and ever. They do not realize that much the greaterpart of a man’s happiness depends upon activity, and only a very smallremnant consists in passive enjoyment. Even the pleasures which doconsist in enjoyment are only satisfactory, to most men, when theycome in the intervals of activity. Social reformers, like inventors ofUtopias, are apt to forget this very obvious fact of human nature. Theyaim rather at securing more leisure, and more opportunity for enjoyingit, than at making work itself more satisfactory, more consonant withimpulse, and a better outlet for creativeness and the desire to employone’s faculties. Work, in the modern world, is, to almost all whodepend on earnings, mere work, not an embodiment of the desire foractivity. Probably this is to a considerable extent inevitable. But inso far as it can be prevented something will be done to give a peacefuloutlet to some of the impulses which lead to war.It would, of course, be easy to bring about peace if there were novigor in the world. The Roman Empire was pacific and unproductive; theAthens of Pericles was the most productive and almost the most warlikecommunity known to history. The only form of production in which ourown age excels is science, and in science Germany, the most warlikeof Great Powers, is supreme. It is useless to multiply examples; butit is plain that the very same vital energy which produces all thatis best also produces war and the love of war. This is the basis ofthe opposition to pacifism felt by many men whose aims and activitiesare by no means brutal. Pacifism, in practice, too often expressesmerely lack of force, not the refusal to use force in thwarting others.Pacifism, if it is to be both victorious and beneficent, must find anoutlet, compatible with humane feeling, for the vigor which now leadsnations into war and destruction.This problem was considered by William James in an admirable address on“The Moral Equivalent of War,” delivered to a congress of pacifistsduring the Spanish-American War of 1898. His statement of the problemcould not be bettered; and so far as I know, he is the only writer whohas faced the problem adequately. But his solution is not adequate;perhaps no adequate solution is possible. The problem, however, isone of degree: every additional peaceful outlet for men’s energiesdiminishes the force which urges nations towards war, and makes warless frequent and less fierce. And as a question of degree, it iscapable of more or less partial solutions.[11]Every vigorous man needs some kind of contest, some sense of resistanceovercome, in order to feel that he is exercising his faculties. Underthe influence of economics, a theory has grown up that what men desireis wealth; this theory has tended to verify itself, because people’sactions are more often determined by what they think they desire thanby what they really desire. The less active members of a communityoften do in fact desire wealth, since it enables them to gratify ataste for passive enjoyment, and to secure respect without exertion.But the energetic men who make great fortunes seldom desire the actualmoney: they desire the sense of power through a contest, and the joy ofsuccessful activity. For this reason, those who are the most ruthlessin making money are often the most willing to give it away; there aremany notorious examples of this among American millionaires. The onlyelement of truth in the economic theory that these men are actuatedby desire for money is this: owing to the fact that money is what is_believed_ to be desirable, the making of money is recognized as thetest of success. What is desired is visible and indubitable success;but this can only be achieved by being one of the few who reach a goalwhich many men would wish to reach. For this reason, public opinionhas a great influence in directing the activities of vigorous men. InAmerica a millionaire is more respected than a great artist; this leadsmen who might become either the one or the other to choose to becomemillionaires. In Renaissance Italy great artists were more respectedthan millionaires, and the result was the opposite of what it is inAmerica.Some pacifists and all militarists deprecate social and politicalconflicts. In this the militarists are in the right, from their pointof view; but the pacifists seem to me mistaken. Conflicts of partypolitics, conflicts between capital and labor, and generally allthose conflicts of principle which do not involve war, serve manyuseful purposes, and do very little harm. They increase men’s interestin public affairs, they afford a comparatively innocent outlet forthe love of contest, and they help to alter laws and institutions,when changing conditions or greater knowledge create the wish for analteration. Everything that intensifies political life tends to bringabout a peaceful interest of the same kind as the interest which leadsto desire for war. And in a democratic community political questionsgive every voter a sense of initiative and power and responsibilitywhich relieves his life of something of its narrow unadventurousness.The object of the pacifist should be to give men more and morepolitical control over their own lives, and in particular to introducedemocracy into the management of industry, as the syndicalists advise.The problem for the reflective pacifist is two-fold: how to keep hisown country at peace, and how to preserve the peace of the world. Itis impossible that the peace of the world should be preserved whilenations are liable to the mood in which Germany entered upon thewar—unless, indeed, one nation were so obviously stronger than allothers combined as to make war unnecessary for that one and hopelessfor all the others. As this war has dragged on its weary length,many people must have asked themselves whether national independenceis worth the price that has to be paid for it. Would it not perhapsbe better to secure universal peace by the supremacy of one Power?“To secure peace by a world federation”—so a submissive pacifist mayargue—“would require some faint glimmerings of reason in rulers andpeoples, and is therefore out of the question; but to secure it byallowing Germany to dictate terms to Europe would be easy, in view ofGermany’s amazing military success. Since there is no other way ofending war”—so our advocate of peace at any price would contend—“letus adopt this way, which happens at the moment to be open to us.” Itis worth while to consider this view more attentively than is commonlyconsidered.There is one great historic example of a long peace secured in thisway; I mean the Roman Empire. We in England boast of the _PaxBritannica_ which we have imposed, in this way, upon the warring racesand religions in India. If we are right in boasting of this, if we havein fact conferred a benefit upon India by enforced peace, the Germanswould be right in boasting if they could impose a _Pax Germanica_ uponEurope. Before the war, men might have said that India and Europeare not analogous, because India is less civilized than Europe; butnow, I hope, no one would have the effrontery to maintain anything sopreposterous. Repeatedly in modern history there has been a chance ofachieving European unity by the hegemony of a single State; but alwaysEngland, in obedience to the doctrine of the Balance of Power, hasprevented this consummation, and preserved what our statesmen havecalled the “liberties of Europe.” It is this task upon which we are nowengaged. But I do not think our statesmen, or any others among us, havemade much effort to consider whether the task is worth what it costs.In one case we were clearly wrong: in our resistance to revolutionaryFrance. If revolutionary France could have conquered the Continent andGreat Britain, the world would now be happier, more civilized, andmore free, as well as more peaceful. But revolutionary France was aquite exceptional case, because its early conquests were made in thename of liberty, against tyrants, not against peoples; and everywherethe French armies were welcomed as liberators by all except rulers andbigots. In the case of Philip II we were as clearly right as we werewrong in 1793. But in both cases our action is not to be judged by someabstract diplomatic conception of the “liberties of Europe,” but by theideals of the Power seeking hegemony, and by the probable effect uponthe welfare of ordinary men and women throughout Europe.“Hegemony” is a very vague word, and everything turns upon the degreeof interference with liberty which it involves. There is a degree ofinterference with liberty which is fatal to many forms of nationallife; for example, Italy in the seventeenth and eighteenth centurieswas crushed by the supremacy of Spain and Austria. If the Germanswere actually to annex French provinces, as they did in 1871, theywould probably inflict a serious injury upon those provinces, and makethem less fruitful for civilization in general. For such reasonsnational liberty is a matter of real importance, and a Europe actuallygoverned by Germany would probably be very dead and unproductive. Butif “hegemony” merely means increased weight in diplomatic questions,more coaling stations and possessions in Africa, more power of securingadvantageous commercial treaties, then it can hardly be supposed thatit would do any vital damage to other nations; certainly it would notdo so much damage as the present war is doing. I cannot doubt that,before the war, a hegemony of this kind would have abundantly satisfiedthe Germans. But the effect of the war, so far, has been to increaseimmeasurably all the dangers which it was intended to avert. We havenow only the choice between certain exhaustion of Europe in fightingGermany and possible damage to the national life of France by Germantyranny. Stated in terms of civilization and human welfare, not interms of national prestige, that is now in fact the issue.Assuming that war is not ended by one State conquering all theothers, the only way in which it can be permanently ended is by aworld-federation. So long as there are many sovereign States, each withits own Army, there can be no security that there will not be war.There will have to be in the world only one Army and one Navy beforethere will be any reason to think that wars have ceased. This meansthat, so far as the military functions of the State are concerned,there will be only one State, which will be world-wide.The civil functions of the State—legislative, administrative, andjudicial—have no very essential connection with the military functions,and there is no reason why both kinds of functions should normally beexercised by the same State. There is, in fact, every reason why thecivil State and the military State should be different. The greatermodern States are already too large for most civil purposes, butfor military purposes they are not large enough, since they are notworld-wide. This difference as to the desirable area for the two kindsof State introduces a certain perplexity and hesitation, when it is notrealized that the two functions have little necessary connection: oneset of considerations points towards small States, the other towardscontinually larger States. Of course, if there were an internationalArmy and Navy, there would have to be some international authorityto set them in motion. But this authority need never concern itselfwith any of the internal affairs of national States: it need onlydeclare the rules which should regulate their relations, and pronouncejudicially when those rules have been so infringed as to call for theintervention of the international force. How easily the limit of theauthority could be fixed may be seen by many actual examples.The civil and military State are often different in practice, for manypurposes. The South American Republics are sovereign for all purposesexcept their relations with Europe, in regard to which they are subjectto the United States: in dealings with Europe, the Army and Navy of theUnited States are their Army and Navy. Our self-governing Dominionsdepend for their defense, not upon their own forces but upon our Navy.Most Governments, nowadays, do not aim at formal annexation of acountry which they wish to incorporate, but only at a protectorate—thatis, civil autonomy subject to military control. Such autonomy is,of course, in practice incomplete, because it does not enable the“protected” country to adopt measures which are vetoed by the Powerin military control. But it may be very nearly complete, as in thecase of our self-governing Dominions. At the other extreme, it maybecome a mere farce, as in Egypt. In the case of an alliance, there iscomplete autonomy of the separate allied countries, together with whatis practically a combination of their military forces into one singleforce.The great advantage of a large military State is that it increases thearea over which internal war is not possible except by revolution. IfEngland and Canada have a disagreement, it is taken as a matter ofcourse that a settlement shall be arrived at by discussion, not byforce. Still more is this the case if Manchester and Liverpool have aquarrel, in spite of the fact that each is autonomous for many localpurposes. No one would have thought it reasonable that Liverpool shouldgo to war to prevent the construction of the Manchester Ship Canal,although almost any two Great Powers would have gone to war overan issue of the same relative importance. England and Russia wouldprobably have gone to war over Persia if they had not been allies; asit is, they arrived by diplomacy at much the same iniquitous result asthey would otherwise have reached by fighting. Australia and Japanwould probably fight if they were both completely independent; but bothdepend for their liberties upon the British Navy, and therefore theyhave to adjust their differences peaceably.The chief disadvantage of a large military State is that, when externalwar occurs, the area affected is greater. The quadruple Entente forms,for the present, one military State; the result is that, becauseof a dispute between Austria and Serbia, Belgium is devastated andAustralians are killed in the Dardanelles. Another disadvantage isthat it facilitates oppression. A large military State is practicallyomnipotent against a small State, and can impose its will, as Englandand Russia did in Persia and as Austria-Hungary has been doing inSerbia. It is impossible to make sure of avoiding oppression by anypurely mechanical guarantees; only a liberal and humane spirit canafford a real protection. It has been perfectly possible for Englandto oppress Ireland, in spite of democracy and the presence of IrishMembers at Westminster. Nor has the presence of Poles in the Reichstagprevented the oppression of Prussian Poland. But democracy andrepresentative government undoubtedly make oppression less probable:they afford a means by which those who might be oppressed can causetheir wishes and grievances to be publicly known, they render itcertain that only a minority can be oppressed, and then only if themajority are nearly unanimous in wishing to oppress them. Also thepractice of oppression affords much more pleasure to the governingclasses, who actually carry it out, than to the mass of the population.For this reason the mass of the population, where it has power, islikely to be less tyrannical than an oligarchy or a bureaucracy.In order to prevent war and at the same time preserve liberty it isnecessary that there should be only one military State in the world,and that when disputes between different countries arise, it shouldact according to the decision of a central authority. This is whatwould naturally result from a federation of the world, if such a thingever came about. But the prospect is remote, and it is worth while toconsider why it is so remote.The unity of a nation is produced by similar habits, instinctiveliking, a common history, and a common pride. The unity of a nation ispartly due to intrinsic affinities between its citizens, but partlyalso to the pressure and contrast of the outside world: if a nationwere isolated, it would not have the same cohesion or the same fervorof patriotism. When we come to alliances of nations, it is seldomanything except outside pressure that produces solidarity. Englandand America, to some extent, are drawn together by the same causeswhich often make national unity: a (more or less) common language,similar political institutions, similar aims in international politics.But England, France, and Russia were drawn together solely by fearof Germany; if Germany had been annihilated by a natural cataclysm,they would at once have begun to hate one another, as they did beforeGermany was strong. For this reason, the possibility of coöperation inthe present alliance against Germany affords no ground whatever forhoping that all the nations of the world might coöperate permanently ina peaceful alliance. The present motive for cohesion, namely a commonfear, would be gone, and could not be replaced by any other motiveunless men’s thoughts and purposes were very different from what theyare now.The ultimate fact from which war results is not economic or political,and does not rest upon any mechanical difficulty of inventing meansfor the peaceful settlement of international disputes. The ultimatefact from which war results is the fact that a large proportion ofmankind have an impulse to conflict rather than harmony, and can onlybe brought to coöperate with others in resisting or attacking a commonenemy. This is the case in private life as well as in the relations ofStates. Most men, when they feel themselves sufficiently strong, set towork to make themselves feared rather than loved; the wish to gain thegood opinion of others is confined, as a rule, to those who have notacquired secure power. The impulse to quarreling and self-assertion,the pleasure of getting one’s own way in spite of opposition, is nativeto most men. It is this impulse, rather than any motive of calculatedself-interest, which produces war, and causes the difficulty ofbringing about a World-State. And this impulse is not confined to onenation; it exists, in varying degrees, in all the vigorous nations ofthe world.But although this impulse is strong, there is no reason why it shouldbe allowed to lead to war. It was exactly the same impulse which led toduelling; yet now civilized men conduct their private quarrels withoutbloodshed. If political contest within a World-State were substitutedfor war, imagination would soon accustom itself to the new situation,as it has accustomed itself to absence of duelling. Through theinfluence of institutions and habits, without any fundamental changein human nature, men would learn to look back upon war as we look uponthe burning of heretics or upon human sacrifice to heathen deities. IfI were to buy a revolver costing several pounds, in order to shoot myfriend with a view to stealing sixpence out of his pocket, I shouldbe thought neither very wise nor very virtuous. But if I can getsixty-five million accomplices to join me in this criminal absurdity, Ibecome one of a great and glorious nation, nobly sacrificing the costof my revolver, perhaps even my life, in order to secure the sixpencefor the honor of my country. Historians, who are almost invariablysycophants, will praise me and my accomplices if we are successful,and say that we are worthy successors of the heroes who overthrew themight of Imperial Rome. But if my opponents are victorious, if theirsixpences are defended at the cost of many pounds each and the livesof a large proportion of the population, then historians will call mea brigand (as I am), and praise the spirit and self-sacrifice of thosewho resisted me.War is surrounded with glamour, by tradition, by Homer and the OldTestament, by early education, by elaborate myths as to the importanceof the issues involved, by the heroism and self-sacrifice, whichthese myths call out. Jephthah sacrificing his daughter is a heroicfigure, but he would have let her live if he had not been deceived bya myth. Mothers sending their sons to the battlefield are heroic, butthey are as much deceived as Jephthah. And, in both cases alike, theheroism which issues in cruelty would be dispelled if there were notsome strain of barbarism in the imaginative outlook from which mythsspring. A God who can be pleased by the sacrifice of an innocent girlcould only be worshiped by men to whom the thought of receiving sucha sacrifice is not wholly abhorrent. A nation which believes that itswelfare can only be secured by suffering and inflicting hundreds ofthousands of equally horrible sacrifices, is a nation which has no veryspiritual conception of what constitutes national welfare. It wouldbe better a hundredfold to forgo material comfort, power, pomp, andoutward glory than to kill and be killed, to hate and be hated, tothrow away in a mad moment of fury the bright heritage of the ages.We have learnt gradually to free our God from the savagery with whichthe primitive Israelites and the Fathers endowed Him: few of us nowbelieve that it is His pleasure to torture most of the human race in aneternity of hell-fire. But we have not yet learnt to free our nationalideals from the ancient taint. Devotion to the nation is perhaps thedeepest and most widespread religion of the present age. Like theancient religions, it demands its persecutions, its holocausts, itslurid heroic cruelties; like them, it is noble, primitive, brutal, andmad. Now, as in the past, religion, lagging behind private consciencesthrough the weight of tradition, steels the hearts of men against mercyand their minds against truth. If the world is to be saved, men mustlearn to be noble without being cruel, to be filled with faith and yetopen to truth, to be inspired by great purposes without hating thosewho try to thwart them. But before this can happen, men must first facethe terrible realization that the gods before whom they have bowed downwere false gods and the sacrifices they have made were vain.