The influence of the Christian religion on daily life has decayed veryrapidly throughout Europe during the last hundred years. Not only hasthe proportion of nominal believers declined, but even among those whobelieve the intensity and dogmatism of belief is enormously diminished.But there is one social institution which is still profoundly affectedby the Christian tradition—I mean the institution of marriage. Thelaw and public opinion as regards marriage are dominated even now toa very great extent by the teachings of the Church, which continue toinfluence in this way the lives of men, women, and children in theirmost intimate concerns.It is marriage as a political institution that I wish to consider,not marriage as a matter for the private morality of each individual.Marriage is regulated by law, and is regarded as a matter in whichthe community has a right to interfere. It is only the action of thecommunity in regard to marriage that I am concerned to discuss: whetherthe present action furthers the life of the community, and if not, inwhat ways it ought to be changed.There are two questions to be asked in regard to any marriage system:first, how it affects the development and character of the men andwomen concerned; secondly, what is its influence on the propagation andeducation of children. These two questions are entirely distinct, anda system may well be desirable from one of these two points of viewwhen it is very undesirable from the other. I propose first to describethe present English law and public opinion and practice in regard tothe relations of the sexes, then to consider their effects as regardschildren, and finally to consider how these effects, which are bad,could be obviated by a system which would also have a better influenceon the character and development of men and women.The law in England is based upon the expectation that the greatmajority of marriages will be lifelong. A marriage can only bedissolved if either the wife or the husband, but not both, can beproved to have committed adultery. In case the husband is the “guiltyparty,” he must also be guilty of cruelty or desertion. Even whenthese conditions are fulfilled, in practice only the well-to-do can bedivorced, because the expense is very great.[17] A marriage cannot bedissolved for insanity or crime, or for cruelty, however abominable,or for desertion, or for adultery by both parties; and it cannot bedissolved for any cause whatever if both husband and wife have agreedthat they wish it dissolved. In all these cases the law regards the manand woman as bound together for life. A special official, the King’sProctor, is employed to prevent divorce when there is collusion andwhen both parties have committed adultery.[18]This interesting system embodies the opinions held by the Church ofEngland some fifty years ago, and by most Nonconformists then and now.It rests upon the assumption that adultery is sin, and that when thissin has been committed by one party to the marriage, the other isentitled to revenge if he is rich. But when both have committed thesame sin, or when the one who has not committed it feels no righteousanger, the right to revenge does not exist. As soon as this point ofview is understood, the law, which at first seems somewhat strange, isseen to be perfectly consistent. It rests, broadly speaking, upon fourpropositions: (1) that sexual intercourse outside marriage is sin; (2)that resentment of adultery by the “innocent” party is a righteoushorror of wrong-doing; (3) that his resentment, but nothing else, maybe rightly regarded as making a common life impossible; (4) that thepoor have no right to fine feelings. The Church of England, under theinfluence of the High Church, has ceased to believe the third of thesepropositions, but it still believes the first and second, and doesnothing actively to show that it disbelieves the fourth.The penalty for infringing the marriage law is partly financial, butdepends mainly upon public opinion. A rather small section of thepublic genuinely believes that sexual relations outside marriage arewicked; those who believe this are naturally kept in ignorance of theconduct of friends who feel otherwise, and are able to go through lifenot knowing how others live or what others think. This small section ofthe public regards as depraved not only actions, but opinions, whichare contrary to its principles. It is able to control the professionsof politicians through its influence on elections, and the votes ofthe House of Lords through the presence of the Bishops. By thesemeans it governs legislation, and makes any change in the marriagelaw almost impossible. It is able, also, to secure in most cases thata man who openly infringes the marriage law shall be dismissed fromhis employment or ruined by the defection of his customers or clients.A doctor or lawyer, or a tradesman in a country town, cannot make aliving, nor can a politician be in Parliament, if he is publicly knownto be “immoral.” Whatever a man’s own conduct may be, he is not likelyto defend publicly those who have been branded, lest some of the odiumshould fall on him. Yet so long as a man has not been branded, few menwill object to him, whatever they may know privately of his behavior inthese respects.Owing to the nature of the penalty, it falls very unequally upondifferent professions. An actor or journalist usually escapes allpunishment. An urban workingman can almost always do as he likes. A manof private means, unless he wishes to take part in public life, neednot suffer at all if he has chosen his friends suitably. Women, whoformerly suffered more than men, now suffer less, since there are largecircles in which no social penalty is inflicted, and a very rapidlyincreasing number of women who do not believe the conventional code.But for the majority of men outside the working classes the penalty isstill sufficiently severe to be prohibitive.The result of this state of things is a widespread but very flimsyhypocrisy, which allows many infractions of the code, and forbidsonly those which must become public. A man may not live openly with awoman who is not his wife, an unmarried woman may not have a child,and neither man nor woman may get into the divorce court. Subject tothese restrictions, there is in practice very great freedom. It is thispractical freedom which makes the state of the law seem tolerable tothose who do not accept the principles upon which it is based. Whathas to be sacrificed to propitiate the holders of strict views is notpleasure, but only children and a common life and truth and honesty.It cannot be supposed that this is the result desired by those whomaintain the code, but equally it cannot be denied that this is theresult which they do in fact achieve. Extra-matrimonial relations whichdo not lead to children and are accompanied by a certain amount ofdeceit remain unpunished, but severe penalties fall on those which arehonest or lead to children.Within marriage, the expense of children leads to continually greaterlimitation of families. The limitation is greatest among those whohave most sense of parental responsibility and most wish to educatetheir children well, since it is to them that the expense of childrenis most severe. But although the economic motive for limiting familieshas hitherto probably been the strongest, it is being continuallyreinforced by another. Women are acquiring freedom—not merely outwardand formal freedom, but inward freedom, enabling them to think andfeel genuinely, not according to received maxims. To the men who haveprated confidently of women’s natural instincts, the result would besurprising if they were aware of it. Very large numbers of women, whenthey are sufficiently free to think for themselves, do not desire tohave children, or at most desire one child in order not to miss theexperience which a child brings. There are women who are intelligentand active-minded who resent the slavery to the body which is involvedin having children. There are ambitious women, who desire a careerwhich leaves no time for children. There are women who love pleasureand gaiety, and women who love the admiration of men; such women willat least postpone child-bearing until their youth is past. All theseclasses of women are rapidly becoming more numerous, and it may besafely assumed that their numbers will continue to increase for manyyears to come.It is too soon to judge with any confidence as to the effects ofwomen’s freedom upon private life and upon the life of the nation.But I think it is not too soon to see that it will be profoundlydifferent from the effect expected by the pioneers of the women’smovement. Men have invented, and women in the past have often accepted,a theory that women are the guardians of the race, that their lifecenters in motherhood, that all their instincts and desires aredirected, consciously or unconsciously, to this end. Tolstoy’s Natachaillustrates this theory: she is charming, gay, liable to passion, untilshe is married; then she becomes merely a virtuous mother, withoutany mental life. This result has Tolstoy’s entire approval. It mustbe admitted that it is very desirable from the point of view of thenation, whatever we may think of it in relation to private life. Itmust also be admitted that it is probably common among women who arephysically vigorous and not highly civilized. But in countries likeFrance and England it is becoming increasingly rare. More and morewomen find motherhood unsatisfying, not what their needs demand. Andmore and more there comes to be a conflict between their personaldevelopment and the future of the community. It is difficult to knowwhat ought to be done to mitigate this conflict, but I think it isworth while to see what are likely to be its effects if it is notmitigated.Owing to the combination of economic prudence with the increasingfreedom of women, there is at present a selective birth-rate of avery singular kind.[19] In France the population is practicallystationary, and in England it is rapidly becoming so; this meansthat some sections are dwindling while others are increasing. Unlesssome change occurs, the sections that are dwindling will practicallybecome extinct, and the population will be almost wholly replenishedfrom the sections that are now increasing.[20] The sections that aredwindling include the whole middle-class and the skilled artisans.The sections that are increasing are the very poor, the shiftless anddrunken, the feeble-minded—feeble-minded women, especially, are aptto be very prolific. There is an increase in those sections of thepopulation which still actively believe the Catholic religion, suchas the Irish and the Bretons, because the Catholic religion forbidslimitation of families. Within the classes that are dwindling, itis the best elements that are dwindling most rapidly. Working-classboys of exceptional ability rise, by means of scholarships, into theprofessional class; they naturally desire to marry into the class towhich they belong by education, not into the class from which theyspring; but as they have no money beyond what they earn, they cannotmarry young, or afford a large family. The result is that in eachgeneration the best elements are extracted from the working classesand artificially sterilized, at least in comparison with those who areleft. In the professional classes the young women who have initiative,energy, or intelligence are as a rule not inclined to marry young, orto have more than one or two children when they do marry. Marriagehas been in the past the only obvious means of livelihood for women;pressure from parents and fear of becoming an old maid combinedto force many women to marry in spite of a complete absence ofinclination for the duties of a wife. But now a young woman of ordinaryintelligence can easily earn her own living, and can acquire freedomand experience without the permanent ties of a husband and a family ofchildren. The result is that if she marries she marries late.For these reasons, if an average sample of children were taken out ofthe population of England, and their parents were examined, it wouldbe found that prudence, energy, intellect, and enlightenment were lesscommon among the parents than in the population in general; whileshiftlessness, feeble-mindedness, stupidity, and superstition were morecommon than in the population in general. It would be found that thosewho are prudent or energetic or intelligent or enlightened actuallyfail to reproduce their own numbers; that is to say, they do not on theaverage have as many as two children each who survive infancy. On theother hand, those who have the opposite qualities have, on the average,more than two children each, and more than reproduce their own numbers.It is impossible to estimate the effect which this will have uponthe character of the population without a much greater knowledge ofheredity than exists at present. But so long as children continue tolive with their parents, parental example and early education musthave a great influence in developing their character, even if we leaveheredity entirely out of account. Whatever may be thought of genius,there can be no doubt that intelligence, whether through heredity orthrough education, tends to run in families, and that the decay of thefamilies in which it is common must lower the mental standard of thepopulation. It seems unquestionable that if our economic system andour moral standards remain unchanged, there will be, in the next twoor three generations, a rapid change for the worse in the character ofthe population in all civilized countries, and an actual diminution ofnumbers in the most civilized.The diminution of numbers, in all likelihood, will rectify itself intime through the elimination of those characteristics which at presentlead to a small birth-rate. Men and women who can still believe theCatholic faith will have a biological advantage; gradually a racewill grow up which will be impervious to all the assaults of reason,and will believe imperturbably that limitation of families leads tohell-fire. Women who have mental interests, who care about art orliterature or politics, who desire a career or who value their liberty,will gradually grow rarer, and be more and more replaced by a placidmaternal type which has no interests outside the home and no dislikeof the burden of motherhood. This result, which ages of masculinedomination have vainly striven to achieve, is likely to be the finaloutcome of women’s emancipation and of their attempt to enter upon awider sphere than that to which the jealousy of men confined them inthe past.Perhaps, if the facts could be ascertained, it would be found thatsomething of the same kind occurred in the Roman Empire. The decay ofenergy and intelligence during the second, third, and fourth centuriesof our era has always remained more or less mysterious. But there isreason to think that then, as now, the best elements of the populationin each generation failed to reproduce themselves, and that the leastvigorous were, as a rule, those to whom the continuance of the race wasdue. One might be tempted to suppose that civilization, when it hasreached a certain height, becomes unstable, and tends to decay throughsome inherent weakness, some failure to adapt the life of instinct tothe intense mental life of a period of high culture. But such vaguetheories have always something glib and superstitious which makes themworthless as scientific explanations or as guides to action. It is notby a literary formula, but by detailed and complex thought, that a truesolution is to be found.Let us first be clear as to what we desire. There is no importance inan increasing population; on the contrary, if the population of Europewere stationary, it would be much easier to promote economic reformand to avoid war. What is regrettable _at present_ is not the declineof the birth-rate in itself, but the fact that the decline is greatestin the best elements of the population. There is reason, however, tofear in the future three bad results: first, an absolute decline in thenumbers of English, French, and Germans; secondly, as a consequenceof this decline, their subjugation by less civilized races and theextinction of their tradition; thirdly, a revival of their numbers ona much lower plane of civilization, after generations of selection ofthose who have neither intelligence nor foresight. If this result isto be avoided, the present unfortunate selectiveness of the birth-ratemust be somehow stopped.The problem is one which applies to the whole of Western civilization.There is no difficulty in discovering a theoretical solution, butthere is great difficulty in persuading men to adopt a solution inpractice, because the effects to be feared are not immediate andthe subject is one upon which people are not in the habit of usingtheir reason. If a rational solution is ever adopted, the cause willprobably be international rivalry. It is obvious that if one State—sayGermany—adopted a rational means of dealing with the matter, it wouldacquire an enormous advantage over other States unless they didlikewise. After the war, it is possible that population questions willattract more attention than they did before, and it is likely thatthey will be studied from the point of view of international rivalry.This motive, unlike reason and humanity, is perhaps strong enough toovercome men’s objections to a scientific treatment of the birth-rate.In the past, at most periods and in most societies, the instincts ofmen and women led of themselves to a more than sufficient birth-rate;Malthus’s statement of the population question had been true enoughup to the time when he wrote. It is still true of barbarous andsemi-civilized races, and of the worst elements among civilized races.But it has become false as regards the more civilized half of thepopulation in Western Europe and America. Among them, instinct nolonger suffices to keep numbers even stationary.We may sum up the reasons for this in order of importance, as follows:—1. The expense of children is very great if parents are conscientious.2. An increasing number of women desire to have no children, or onlyone or two, in order not to be hampered in their own careers.3. Owing to the excess of women, a large number of women remainunmarried. These women, though not debarred in practice from relationswith men, are debarred by the code from having children. In this classare to be found an enormous and increasing number of women who earntheir own living as typists, in shops, or otherwise. The war has openedmany employments to women from which they were formerly excluded, andthis change is probably only in part temporary.If the sterilizing of the best parts of the population is to bearrested, the first and most pressing necessity is the removal ofthe economic motives for limiting families. The expense of childrenought to be borne wholly by the community. Their food and clothingand education ought to be provided, not only to the very poor as amatter of charity, but to all classes as a matter of public interest.In addition to this, a woman who is capable of earning money, and whoabandons wage-earning for motherhood, ought to receive from the Stateas nearly as possible what she would have received if she had not hadchildren. The only condition attached to State maintenance of themother and the children should be that both parents are physically andmentally sound in all ways likely to affect the children. Those whoare not sound should not be debarred from having children, but shouldcontinue, as at present, to bear the expense of children themselves.It ought to be recognized that the law is only concerned with marriagethrough the question of children, and should be indifferent to whatis called “morality,” which is based upon custom and texts of theBible, not upon any real consideration of the needs of the community.The excess women, who at present are in every way discouraged fromhaving children, ought no longer to be discouraged. If the State isto undertake the expense of children, it has the right, on eugenicgrounds, to know who the father is, and to demand a certain stabilityin a union. But there is no reason to demand or expect a lifelongstability, or to exact any ground for divorce beyond mutual consent.This would make it possible for the women who must at present remainunmarried to have children if they wished it. In this way an enormousand unnecessary waste would be prevented, and a great deal of needlessunhappiness would be avoided.There is no necessity to begin such a system all at once. It might bebegun tentatively with certain exceptionally desirable sections of thecommunity. It might then be extended gradually, with the experience ofits working which had been derived from the first experiment. If thebirth-rate were very much increased, the eugenic conditions exactedmight be made more strict.There are of course various practical difficulties in the way of such ascheme: the opposition of the Church and the upholders of traditionalmorality, the fear of weakening parental responsibility, and theexpense. All these, however, might be overcome. But there remains onedifficulty which it seems impossible to overcome completely in England,and that is, that the whole conception is anti-democratic, since itregards some men as better than others, and would demand that the Stateshould bestow a better education upon the children of some men thanupon the children of others. This is contrary to all the principlesof progressive politics in England. For this reason it can hardly beexpected that any such method of dealing with the population questionwill ever be adopted in its entirety in this country. Something of thesort may well be done in Germany, and if so, it will assure Germanhegemony as no merely military victory could do. But among ourselveswe can only hope to see it adopted in some partial, piecemeal fashion,and probably only after a change in the economic structure of societywhich will remove most of the artificial inequalities that progressiveparties are rightly trying to diminish.So far we have been considering the question of the reproduction of therace, rather than the effect of sex relations in fostering or hinderingthe development of men and women. From the point of view of the race,what seems needed is a complete removal of the economic burdens due tochildren from all parents who are not physically or mentally unfit, andas much freedom in the law as is compatible with public knowledge ofpaternity. Exactly the same changes seem called for when the questionis considered from the point of view of the men and women concerned.In regard to marriage, as with all the other traditional bonds betweenhuman beings, a very extraordinary change is taking place, whollyinevitable, wholly necessary as a stage in the development of a newlife, but by no means wholly satisfactory until it is completed. Allthe traditional bonds were based on _authority_—of the king, thefeudal baron, the priest, the father, the husband. All these bonds,just because they were based on authority, are dissolving or alreadydissolved, and the creation of other bonds to take their place is asyet very incomplete. For this reason human relations have at presentan unusual triviality, and do less than they did formerly to break downthe hard walls of the Ego.The ideal of marriage in the past depended upon the authority of thehusband, which was admitted as a right by the wife. The husband wasfree, the wife was a willing slave. In all matters which concernedhusband and wife jointly, it was taken for granted that the husband’sfiat should be final. The wife was expected to be faithful, while thehusband, except in very religious societies, was only expected to throwa decent veil over his infidelities. Families could not be limitedexcept by continence, and a wife had no recognized right to demandcontinence, however she might suffer from frequent children.So long as the husband’s right to authority was unquestioninglybelieved by both men and women, this system was fairly satisfactory,and afforded to both a certain instinctive fulfilment which is rarelyachieved among educated people now. Only one will, the husband’s,had to be taken into account, and there was no need of the difficultadjustments required when common decisions have to be reached by twoequal wills. The wife’s desires were not treated seriously enough toenable them to thwart the husband’s needs, and the wife herself, unlessshe was exceptionally selfish, did not seek self-development, or see inmarriage anything but an opportunity for duties. Since she did not seekor expect much happiness, she suffered less, when happiness was notattained, than a woman does now: her suffering contained no element ofindignation or surprise, and did not readily turn into bitterness andsense of injury.The saintly, self-sacrificing woman whom our ancestors praised had herplace in a certain organic conception of society, the conception of theordered hierarchy of authorities which dominated the Middle Ages. Shebelongs to the same order of ideas as the faithful servant, the loyalsubject, and the orthodox son of the Church. This whole order of ideashas vanished from the civilized world, and it is to be hoped that ithas vanished for ever, in spite of the fact that the society which itproduced was vital and in some ways full of nobility. The old orderhas been destroyed by the new ideals of justice and liberty, beginningwith religion, passing on to politics, and reaching at last the privaterelations of marriage and the family. When once the question has beenasked, “Why should a woman submit to a man?” when once the answersderived from tradition and the Bible have ceased to satisfy, thereis no longer any possibility of maintaining the old subordination.To every man who has the power of thinking impersonally and freely,it is obvious, as soon as the question is asked, that the rights ofwomen are precisely the same as the rights of men. Whatever dangersand difficulties, whatever temporary chaos, may be incurred in thetransition to equality, the claims of reason are so insistent and soclear that no opposition to them can hope to be long successful.Mutual liberty, which is now demanded, is making the old form ofmarriage impossible. But a new form, which shall be an equally goodvehicle for instinct, and an equal help to spiritual growth, has notyet been developed. For the present, women who are conscious of libertyas something to be preserved are also conscious of the difficulty ofpreserving it. The wish for mastery is an ingredient in most men’ssexual passions, especially in those which are strong and serious. Itsurvives in many men whose theories are entirely opposed to despotism.The result is a fight for liberty on the one side and for life on theother. Women feel that they must protect their individuality; men feel,often very dumbly, that the repression of instinct which is demandedof them is incompatible with vigor and initiative. The clash of theseopposing moods makes all real mingling of personalities impossible;the man and woman remain hard, separate units, continually askingthemselves whether anything of value to themselves is resulting fromthe union. The effect is that relations tend to become trivial andtemporary, a pleasure rather than the satisfaction of a profound need,an excitement, not an attainment. The fundamental loneliness into whichwe are born remains untouched, and the hunger for inner companionshipremains unappeased.No cheap and easy solution of this trouble is possible. It is a troublewhich affects most the most civilized men and women, and is an outcomeof the increasing sense of individuality which springs inevitably frommental progress. I doubt if there is any radical cure except in someform of religion, so firmly and sincerely believed as to dominateeven the life of instinct. The individual is not the end and aim ofhis own being: outside the individual, there is the community, thefuture of mankind, the immensity of the universe in which all ourhopes and fears are a mere pin-point. A man and woman with reverencefor the spirit of life in each other, with an equal sense of their ownunimportance beside the whole life of man, may become comrades withoutinterference with liberty, and may achieve the union of instinctwithout doing violence to the life of mind and spirit. As religiondominated the old form of marriage, so religion must dominate the new.But it must be a new religion, based upon liberty, justice, and love,not upon authority and law and hell-fire.A bad effect upon the relations of men and women has been produced bythe romantic movement, through directing attention to what ought to bean incidental good, not the purpose for which relations exist. Love iswhat gives intrinsic value to a marriage, and, like art and thought, itis one of the supreme things which make human life worth preserving.But though there is no good marriage without love, the best marriageshave a purpose which goes beyond love. The love of two people foreach other is too circumscribed, too separate from the community, tobe by itself the main purpose of a good life. It is not in itself asufficient source of activities, it is not sufficiently prospective,to make an existence in which ultimate satisfaction can be found. Itbrings its great moments, and then its times which are less great,which are unsatisfying because they are less great. It becomes, sooneror later, retrospective, a tomb of dead joys, not a well-spring of newlife. This evil is inseparable from any purpose which is to be achievedin a single supreme emotion. The only adequate purposes are those whichstretch out into the future, which can never be fully achieved, but arealways growing, and infinite with the infinity of human endeavor. Andit is only when love is linked to some infinite purpose of this kindthat it can have the seriousness and depth of which it is capable.For the great majority of men and women seriousness in sex relationsis most likely to be achieved through children. Children are tomost people rather a need than a desire: instinct is as a rule onlyconsciously directed towards what used to lead to children. The desirefor children is apt to develop in middle life, when the adventure ofone’s own existence is past, when the friendships of youth seem lessimportant than they once did, when the prospect of a lonely old agebegins to terrify, and the feeling of having no share in the futurebecomes oppressive. Then those who, while they were young, have hadno sense that children would be a fulfilment of their needs, begin toregret their former contempt for the normal, and to envy acquaintanceswhom before they had thought humdrum. But owing to economic causes itis often impossible for the young, and especially for the best of theyoung, to have children without sacrificing things of vital importanceto their own lives. And so youth passes, and the need is felt too late.Needs without corresponding desires have grown increasingly common aslife has grown more different from that primitive existence from whichour instincts are derived, and to which, rather than to that of thepresent day, they are still very largely adapted. An unsatisfied needproduces, in the end, as much pain and as much distortion of characteras if it had been associated with a conscious desire. For this reason,as well as for the sake of the race, it is important to remove thepresent economic inducements to childlessness. There is no necessitywhatever to urge parenthood upon those who feel disinclined to it, butthere is necessity not to place obstacles in the way of those who haveno such disinclination.In speaking of the importance of preserving seriousness in therelations of men and women, I do not mean to suggest that relationswhich are not serious are always harmful. Traditional morality haserred by laying stress on what ought not to happen, rather than onwhat ought to happen. What is important is that men and women shouldfind, sooner or later, the best relation of which their natures arecapable. It is not always possible to know in advance what will be thebest, or to be sure of not missing the best if everything that can bedoubted is rejected. Among primitive races, a man wants a female, awoman wants a male, and there is no such differentiation as makes onea much more suitable companion than another. But with the increasingcomplexity of disposition that civilized life brings, it becomes moreand more difficult to find the man or woman who will bring happiness,and more and more necessary to make it not too difficult to acknowledgea mistake.The present marriage law is an inheritance from a simpler age, andis supported, in the main, by unreasoning fears and by contempt forall that is delicate and difficult in the life of the mind. Owingto the law, large numbers of men and women are condemned, so faras their ostensible relations are concerned, to the society of anutterly uncongenial companion, with all the embittering consciousnessthat escape is practically impossible. In these circumstances,happier relations with others are often sought, but they have to beclandestine, without a common life, and without children. Apart fromthe great evil of being clandestine, such relations have some almostinevitable drawbacks. They are liable to emphasize sex unduly, to beexciting and disturbing; and it is hardly possible that they shouldbring a real satisfaction of instinct. It is the combination of love,children, and a common life that makes the best relation between a manand a woman. The law at present confines children and a common lifewithin the bonds of monogamy, but it cannot confine love. By forcingmany to separate love from children and a common life, the law crampstheir lives, prevents them from reaching the full measure of theirpossible development, and inflicts a wholly unnecessary torture uponthose who are not content to become frivolous.To sum up: The present state of the law, of public opinion, and ofour economic system is tending to degrade the quality of the race, bymaking the worst half of the population the parents of more than halfof the next generation. At the same time, women’s claim to libertyis making the old form of marriage a hindrance to the development ofboth men and women. A new system is required, if the European nationsare not to degenerate, and if the relations of men and women are tohave the strong happiness and organic seriousness which belonged tothe best marriages in the past. The new system must be based upon thefact that to produce children is a service to the State, and oughtnot to expose parents to heavy pecuniary penalties. It will have torecognize that neither the law nor public opinion should concern itselfwith the private relations of men and women, except where childrenare concerned. It ought to remove the inducements to make relationsclandestine and childless. It ought to admit that, although lifelongmonogamy is best when it is successful, the increasing complexity ofour needs makes it increasingly often a failure for which divorceis the best preventive. Here, as elsewhere, liberty is the basis ofpolitical wisdom. And when liberty has been won, what remains to bedesired must be left to the conscience and religion of individual menand women.